common_name, scientific_name, family, habitat, feeding behavior, eggs/youth, diet, nesting 
Aberts-Towhee,Melozone aberti,New World Sparrows,Desert streams; brush; mesquite. Typically found in dense brush near water in arid lowlands; as in streamside thickets; edges of ponds or irrigation ditches; understory of cottonwood-willow groves; even riverside marshes. In some areas (such as around Phoenix); comes into yards in well-watered suburbs. Overlaps in habitat with Canyon Towhee in some places; but Abert's stays closer to water in dense cover; avoiding dry open hillsides.,Forages mostly on the ground; often scratching with both feet. Also forages on bark at base of trees; and in low bushes. Members of a pair often forage together.,1-4; usually 3. Pale blue or whitish with markings of dark brown and black. Incubation is apparently by female only; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 12-13 days after hatching; before they are full-grown; but unable to fly for another week; tended by parents for a month or more. Often 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Insects make up majority of diet; especially in summer; major items include beetles; ants; caterpillars; grasshoppers; and cicadas. Also eats many seeds; including those of saltbush; weeds; and grasses. ,Members of pair remain together all year on permanent territories; courtship and pair formation may occur at any season; but nesting is mainly March through July. Both members of pair evidently defend nesting territory. Nest site is in dense shrub or tree such as mesquite; willow; baccharis; or elderberry; often well hidden within clump of mistletoe; usually 5-8' above the ground; but can be higher. Nest (built by female) is a bulky open cup; loosely made of weeds; bark strips; grass; leaves; vines; lined with dry grass and sometimes hair. 
Acadian-Flycatcher,Empidonax virescens,Tyrant Flycatchers,Deciduous forests; ravines; swampy woods; beech groves. Breeds mostly in wet deciduous forest; such as in swamps or dense riverside woods; also in the understory of drier woods. Often nests in beech trees where they occur. Winters in the tropics in woodland or along its edges.,Forages by watching from a perch; usually at mid levels within the forest; and then flying out to catch insects in the air. Also takes some food (such as caterpillars and spiders) from foliage or twigs while hovering.,3; sometimes 2-4. Creamy white; lightly spotted with brown. Incubation is by female; 13-15 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Age of young at first flight about 13-15 days. Male may continue to feed fledglings from first nest while female begins incubating the second clutch of the season.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; especially wasps; bees; ants; caterpillars; and beetles; also flies; moths; true bugs; and others. Also eats some spiders; millipedes; and some small fruits and berries. ,Courtship displays involve rapid aerial chases through the trees; male may hover above female when she stops to perch. Nest site is in tree or large shrub; usually deciduous; averaging 13' above ground; sometimes 4-50' up. Usually suspended within horizontal fork of branch well out from trunk. Nest (built by female) is a rather loosely made cup of weed stems; twigs; grass; and other plant fibers; sometimes lined with finer materials such as rootlets and plant down. Webs of spiders and caterpillars probably help to hold nest together. Usually has trailing strands of weeds or other materials hanging below; giving nest a sloppy or abandoned appearance. 
Acorn-Woodpecker,Melanerpes formicivorus,Woodpeckers,Oak woods; groves; mixed forest; oak-pine canyons; foothills. Seldom away from oaks. Most common where several species of oaks occur together (this insures against total failure of local acorn crop; as different oaks respond to different conditions). May be in open oak groves near coast; pine-oak woods in mountains; streamside sycamores next to oak-covered hillsides.,Members of group harvest acorns in fall; store them in hole-studded trees; feed on them in following seasons. Insects are gleaned from surface of tree; or caught in swooping; acrobatic flight. Unlike most woodpeckers; rarely or never excavates in wood for insects. May feed on sap; digging pits in bark or visiting those made by sapsuckers.,3-7. White. Nests with more eggs (up to 17 recorded) must result from more than one female laying. Incubation mainly by both parents at first; with helpers soon joining in; incubating birds take turns; with rapid turnover; sometimes changing places many times per hour. Incubation period 11-14 days. Young: Are fed by both parents and by helpers; and leave nest at about 30-32 days. 1-2 broods per year; possibly sometimes 3.,Omnivorous; eats many acorns and insects. Acorns make up about half of annual diet; and are of major importance during winter. Also feeds on insects; particularly ants. Diet also includes various nuts; fruits; seeds; sometimes eggs of other birds. ,Breeding group consists of pair; usually assisted by additional birds; generally the pair's earlier offspring or other related individuals. Group may consist of 10+ birds (as many as 16); which defend communal food stores and nesting territory year-round. Nest site is a cavity in tree (almost always dead tree or dead branch of live tree); 5-60' above ground; usually 12-30'. Excavated by both sexes and by helpers. 
Alder-Flycatcher,Empidonax alnorum,Tyrant Flycatchers,Willows; alders; brushy swamps; swales. Breeds in thickets of deciduous trees and shrubs; usually near water; as around streams; ponds; or bogs. Especially common in thickets of willows or alders. Winters in woodland edges or second growth in the tropics; especially near water.,Forages by watching from a perch and then flying out to catch insects. Usually forages from perches within tall shrubs or low trees; catches insects in mid-air; or takes them from foliage while hovering.,3-4; rarely 2. White; with brown spots concentrated toward larger end. Incubation is by female; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 13-14 days.,Mostly insects. Differences in diet; if any; between this species and Willow Flycatcher are not well known. Apparently eats mostly insects; including wasps; bees; winged ants; beetles; flies; caterpillars; moths; true bugs; and others. Also eats some spiders; a few berries; and possibly some seeds. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing. Courtship behavior is not well known; probably involves male actively chasing female through the trees. Nest site is usually low in a deciduous shrub; averaging about 2' up; usually lower than 6' above the ground. Placed in a vertical or diagonal fork in a branch. Nest (probably built by female alone) is an open cup; usually built rather loosely of grass; weeds; strips of bark; small twigs; rootlets; lined with plant down or other soft materials. Nest may have strips of grass or bark dangling from the bottom. 
Aleutian-Tern,Onychoprion aleuticus,Gulls and Terns,Northern coasts (summer); open ocean (winter). During most of year apparently at sea; moving south to tropics in winter; although details poorly known. In breeding season along northern coastlines; foraging mostly offshore; nesting on open islands; sandbars; or beaches with dense low ground cover.,Forages mostly by flying or hovering low over water; dipping down to take items from surface; apparently seldom plunge-dives into water.,1-2; sometimes 3. Buff to olive; heavily marked with dark brown. Incubation is probably by both sexes; about 22-23 days. Young: Both parents probably bring food for young. Age at first flight about 25-31 days. Young may remain around colony one or two weeks after fledging; age at independence unknown.,Includes crustaceans; fish; insects. Diet in summer includes many euphausiid shrimp and other crustaceans; small fish; and insects. Winter diet essentially unknown. ,Usually nests in small colonies; often associated with Arctic Terns. Unlike most terns; parents do little or nothing to defend nest against predators or intruders; simply departing at approach of danger. May benefit by nesting with Arctic Terns; which are more aggressive in defense of colony. Nest site is close to water on low sandspit; island; or beach; among grasses or other vegetation. Nest is inconspicuous; a shallow depression in moss; matted grass; low vegetation. 
Allens-Hummingbird,Selasphorus sasin,Hummingbirds,Brushy canyons; parks; gardens. Breeds in a variety of semi-open habitats; including open oak woods; streamside groves; well-wooded suburbs; city parks. Winters mostly in foothills and mountain forests in Mexico. Migrants also occur in high mountain meadows in late summer.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill deep into the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and take them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage; also sometimes will take spiders or trapped insects from spider webs.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; 17-22 days. Young: Female feeds the young. The nest stretches as the young birds grow. Age of young at first flight about 22-25 days.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Favors red tubular flowers such as penstemon; red monkey-flower; red columbine; paintbrush; scarlet sage; also flowers of other colors; such as the yellow blooms of tree-tobacco. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Male's courtship display is in J-shaped pattern: flying high; diving steeply with metallic whine at bottom of dive; then curving up to hover at moderate height; often preceded by a back-and-forth pendulum flight in front of the female. Nest site is in a tree or shrub; rarely on a weed stalk; usually low (but rarely up to 90 feet above the ground) on a horizontal or diagonal branch. Nest (built by female alone) is a neatly constructed cup of green mosses and plant fibers; held together with spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged with bits of lichen. 
Altamira-Oriole,Icterus gularis,Blackbirds and Orioles,Open tropical woodland and edges. In our area; resident mostly in native woodland near Rio Grande in southern Texas. Farther south in Mexico and Central America; widespread in lowlands and lower foothills in open dry woods; forest edge; streamside groves; scattered trees in open country; usually avoids unbroken humid forest.,Forages rather slowly and deliberately in trees; mostly high but also in low undergrowth; searching for insects. Will come to feeders for sugar-water and sometimes for other items.,4-6; or fewer in southern part of range. Pale bluish white; blotched with black and lavender. Incubation behavior poorly known; probably lasts about 2 weeks. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known.,Mostly insects and berries. Diet is not known in detail; feeds on many insects; especially grasshoppers; crickets; and caterpillars; also ants and many others; plus spiders. Also feeds on berries and small fruits; including those of hackberries and figs. ,In Texas; breeds mostly from late April to late July. Nest: Placed quite conspicuously out at the end of a horizontal branch of a tree; averages about 30' up; can be 10-80' above the ground. In the tropics; nest may be suspended from telephone wires. Nest is a very long hanging bag or pouch (with the entrance at the top); up to 2' long; woven of Spanish moss; grass; palm fibers; weeds; strips of bark; lined with plant down; hair; or feathers. Probably built by female; the process may take 3 weeks or more. 
American-Avocet,Recurvirostra americana,Stilts and Avocets,Beaches; flats; shallow lakes; prairie ponds. Widespread on shallow waters and extensive mudflats; both along coast and in the interior. Typically in very open situations; with little vegetation. Inland; often favors salty or alkaline lakes more than fresh waters.,Forages in a variety of ways. Often sweeps head from side to side; with upturned tip of bill barely submerged in shallow water; finding food by touch. Also finds food visually; picking items from surface of water or mud; or plunging head into water; sometimes snatches flying insects as they pass.,4; sometimes 3-5. Olive-buff; blotched with brown and black. Incubation is by both parents; 23-25 days. Female incubates at night; both sexes take turns during day. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching; find all their own food. Both parents tend young. Age at first flight about 4-5 weeks.,Mostly small crustaceans and insects; also some seeds. Feeds on abundant tiny creatures that live in or near shallow water. Diet includes many midge larvae and other aquatic insects; small crustaceans. On lakes in west may feed heavily on brine shrimp and brine flies. ,Typically nests in loose colonies; sometimes mixed with Black-necked Stilts. If predators approach a colony on foot; several adults may perform a distraction display nearby; running about in a crouch with both wings spread. If eggs or young are directly threatened; adult avocets may fly straight at an intruder; calling loudly. Nest site is on bare open ground; not far from water. Nest (built by both sexes) may be a simple scrape in soil; or scrape lined with pebbles and other debris; or a mound built up to more than a foot tall. 
American-Bittern,Botaurus lentiginosus,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Marshes; reedy lakes. Breeds in freshwater marshes; mainly large; shallow wetlands with much tall marsh vegetation (cattails; grasses; sedges) and areas of open shallow water. Winters in similar areas; also in brackish coastal marshes. Sometimes feeds in dry grassy fields.,Forages mostly by standing still at edge of water; sometimes by walking slowly; capturing prey with sudden thrust of bill. May forage at any time of day or night; perhaps most actively at dawn and dusk.,3-5; sometimes 2-7. Pale brown to olive-buff. Incubation is by female only; 24-28 days. Young:  Evidently only female cares for young; feeding them by regurgitation of partly-digested items. Young may leave nest after 1-2 weeks; but remain nearby and are fed up to age of 4 weeks. Age at first flight unknown; possibly 7-8 weeks.,Mostly fish and other aquatic life. Eats fish (including catfish; eels; killifish; perch); frogs; tadpoles; aquatic insects; crayfish; crabs; salamanders; garter snakes. Has been seen catching flying dragonflies. In drier habitats may eat rodents; especially voles. ,Male defends nesting territory by advertising presence with "booming" calls. Courtship displays not well known; male may hold head low and fluff out white feathers on sides. One male may mate with two or three females. Nest:  Site is usually in dense marsh growth above shallow water; sometimes on dry ground among dense grasses. Nest (apparently built by female alone) is a platform of grasses; reeds; cattails; lined with fine grasses. 
American-Black-Duck,Anas rubripes,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; bays; estuaries; ponds; rivers; lakes. Wide variety of aquatic habitats; found on lakes in northern forest and in salt marsh more often than most dabblers. Majority in winter in coastal estuaries and tidal marshes; lesser numbers on inland lakes; tree-lined ponds; wooded swamps.,feeds in water by dabbling; up-ending; rarely by diving; feeds on land by grazing; plucking seeds; grubbing for roots.,7-11; sometimes 6-12; rarely 4-17. Creamy white to greenish buff. Incubation by female only; 23-33 days; typically 26-29. Young: all eggs typically hatch in space of a few hours. Female leads young to water; often after dark. Ducklings find their own food. Young fledge at age of about 2 months; and are abandoned by female about that time.,omnivorous. Diet varies with location and season. On fresh water; feeds mainly on plant material; including seeds; leaves; roots; berries. Seeds of various grasses; pondweeds; sedges; and others often a major part of diet. In tidal zones may feed mainly on mussels; clams; snails; small crustaceans; aquatic arthropods. Young ducklings eat many insects. ,Older birds may form pairs by early fall and remain together until following summer. Nest site variable; usually near water; as on banks or small islands; but can be up to a mile distant. Generally on ground among clumps of dense vegetation; sometimes in raised situation as on top of stump; in large tree cavity; on duck blind in water. Typical ground nest (built by female) is a shallow depression with plant material added; lined with down. 
American-Coot,Fulica americana,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Ponds; lakes; marshes; in winter; also fields; park ponds; salt bays. For breeding season requires fairly shallow fresh water with much marsh vegetation. At other seasons may be in almost any aquatic habitat; including ponds or reservoirs with bare shorelines; open ground near lakes; on salt marshes or protected coastal bays. Migrants sometimes are seen out at sea some distance from land.,Wide variety of foraging methods -- dabbles at surface of water; upends in shallows; dives underwater (propelled by feet); grazes on land. Also steals food from various ducks.,6-11; sometimes 2-12. Buff to grayish with brown spots. Nests with more than 12 eggs probably indicate laying by more than 1 female. Incubation by both sexes; 21-25 days. Young: can swim well soon after hatching; follow parents and are fed by them. At night; young are brooded on a nest-like platform built by male. Young probably able to fly at about 7-8 weeks after hatching. 1 or 2 broods per year.,Omnivorous. Eats mostly plant material; including stems; leaves; and seeds of pondweeds; sedges; grasses; and many others; also much algae. Also eats insects; tadpoles; fish; worms; snails; crayfish; prawns; eggs of other birds. ,Very aggressive in defense of nesting territory. In courtship; male may pursue female across water. Displays include swimming with head and neck lowered; wings arched; tail raised to show off white patches. Nest site is among tall marsh vegetation in shallow water. Nest (built by both sexes) is floating platform of dead cattails; bulrushes; sedges; lined with finer materials; anchored to standing plants. Several similar platforms may be built; only one or two used for nesting. 
American-Crow,Corvus brachyrhynchos,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Woodlands; farms; fields; river groves; shores; towns. Lives in a wide variety of semi-open habitats; from farming country and open fields to clearings in the woods. Often found on shores; especially where Fish Crow and Northwestern Crow do not occur. Avoids hot desert zones. Is adapting to towns and even cities; now often nesting in city parks.,Opportunistic; quickly taking advantage of new food sources. Feeds mostly on the ground; sometimes in trees. Scavenges along roads and at dumps. Will carry hard-shelled mollusks high in air and drop them on rocks to break them open. Indigestible parts of food are coughed up later as pellets.,4-6; sometimes 3-9. Dull blue-green to gray-green; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is probably mostly or entirely by female; about 18 days. Young: Fed by both parents and sometimes by "helpers."  Young leave nest about 4-5 weeks after hatching.,Omnivorous. Seems to feed on practically anything it can find; including insects; spiders; snails; earthworms; frogs; small snakes; shellfish; carrion; garbage; eggs and young of other birds; seeds; grain; berries; fruit. ,In courtship on ground or in tree; male faces female; fluffs up body feathers; partly spreads wings and tail; and bows repeatedly while giving a short rattling song. Mated pairs perch close together; touching bills and preening each other's feathers. Breeding pair may be assisted by "helpers;" their offspring from previous seasons. Nest site is in tree or large shrub; 10-70' above the ground; usually in vertical fork or at base of branch against trunk. Rarely nests on ground or on building ledge. Nest (built by both sexes) is a large bulky basket of sticks; twigs; bark strips; weeds; and mud; lined with softer material such as grass; moss; plant fibers; feathers. 
American-Dipper,Cinclus mexicanus,Dippers,Fast-flowing streams in mountains. Breeds along swift; rocky streams; seeming to favor clear; cold water; often in narrow canyons. Mostly lives in mountainous areas; but sometimes (especially in Alaska) may be along streams through level country; even near sea level. In winter; may move to streams at lower elevations; sometimes accepting narrow creeks or slower-moving rivers.,Most food is caught underwater. The Dipper may walk with only its head submerged; or may dive; "flying" underwater and walking on the bottom; probing under stones in streambed. Also will swim on surface to pick up floating insects. Occasionally takes insects from streamside rocks; rarely makes short flights to catch insects in mid-air.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White. Incubation is by female; 13-17 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings (but female may do more). Young leave the nest at about 18-25 days; and are able to swim and dive almost immediately.,Mostly aquatic insects. Feeds on many kinds of aquatic insects; including larvae of caddisflies; mayflies; beetles; bugs; and mosquitoes; as well as adults of these insects and many others; also some worms and snails. Also eats fish eggs and very small fish (less than 3" long). ,In courtship; either male or female may strut and sing in front of other bird; with wings drooping and bill pointed up. Nest: Natural sites include slight ledge on mossy rock wall just above stream; among roots on dirt bank; or behind waterfall; often placed where nest remains continuously wet from flying spray. Many nests today are built under bridges that cross mountain streams. Nest (probably built by female) is a domed structure about a foot in diameter; with a large entrance low on one side; made of mosses; some of them still green and growing; often with some twigs; rootlets; or grass woven in. 
American-Flamingo,Phoenicopterus ruber,Flamingos,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
American-Golden-Plover,Pluvialis dominica,Plovers,Prairies; mudflats; shores; tundra (summer). During migration; usually found on short-grass prairies; flooded pastures; plowed fields; less often on mudflats; beaches. Breeds on Arctic tundra. In western Alaska; where it overlaps with Pacific Golden-Plover; the American tends to nest at higher elevations; on more barren tundra slopes.,Typically they walk or run a few steps and then pause; then move forward again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible.,4; sometimes 3. Pale buff to cinnamon; boldly blotched with black and brown; well camouflaged when seen against varied tundra vegetation. Incubation is by both parents; about 26-27 days. Male reportedly incubates by day; female at night. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Both parents tend young; but young find all their own food. Age at first flight about 22-24 days.,Mostly insects. On breeding grounds; apparently feeds mostly on insects; including flies; beetles; and others; also some snails and seeds. In migration in open fields; eats wide variety of insects; including grasshoppers; caterpillars; larvae of beetles. On shores; also feeds on small crustaceans and mollusks. In late summer; may eat many berries. ,Males perform flight display over breeding territory by flying high; with exaggerated slow; deep wingbeats; while repeatedly giving a short kt-dlink call. In courtship; male walks up to female in crouching posture with tail raised; neck stretched forward. Nest site is on ground on very open; dry tundra. Nest (probably built by male) is shallow depression in tundra; lined with lichens; moss; grass; leaves. 
American-Goldfinch,Spinus tristis,Finches,Patches of thistles and weeds; roadsides; open woods; edges. Found at all seasons in semi-open areas having open weedy ground and some trees and bushes for shelter; especially areas of second growth; streamsides; roadsides; woodland edges; orchards; suburban areas. In winter also in some very open fields farther from trees.,Forages actively in weeds; shrubs; and trees; often climbing about acrobatically on plants such as thistles to reach the seeds. Except during breeding season; usually forages in flocks. Commonly comes to feeders for small seeds.,4-6; sometimes 2-7. Pale bluish white; occasionally with light brown spots. Incubation is by female only; about 12-14 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. At first male brings food; female gives it to young; then both parents feed; role of female gradually declines; so that male may provide most food in later stages. Young leave nest about 11-17 days after hatching.,Mostly seeds; some insects. Diet is primarily seeds; especially those of the daisy (composite) family; also those of weeds and grasses; and small seeds of trees such as elm; birch; and alder. Also eats buds; bark of young twigs; maple sap. Feeds on insects to a limited extent in summer. Young are fed regurgitated matter mostly made up of seeds. ,Nesting begins late in season in many areas; with most nesting activity during July and August. In courtship; male performs fluttering flight display while singing. Nest: Usually in deciduous shrubs or trees; sometimes in conifers or in dense weeds; usually less than 30' above the ground and placed in horizontal or upright fork. Nest (built by female) is a solid; compact cup of plant fibers; spiderwebs; plant down (especially from thistles); nest is so well-made that it may even hold water. 
American-Kestrel,Falco sparverius,Falcons,Open country; farmland; cities; wood edges. Inhabits any kind of open or semi-open situation; from forest clearings to farmland to desert; wherever it can find adequate prey and some raised perches. In breeding season; may be limited to habitats that also provide appropriate nesting sites. In winter; females may tend to be found in more open habitats than males.,Hunts mostly by watching from a high perch; then swooping down to capture prey. Sometimes; especially when no good perch available; hovers over fields to watch for prey. May pursue and catch insects; birds; or bats in flight. Individual kestrels often specialize on one particular kind of prey.,4-6; rarely 2-7. White to pale brown; usually spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by both parents; usually 28-31 days. Young: Female remains with young most of time at first; while male brings food; after 1-2 weeks; female hunts also. Age of young at first flight about 28-31 days. Parents continue to feed young up to 12 days after fledging; later; these juveniles may gather in groups with young from other nests.,Mostly large insects; also some small mammals; birds; reptiles. Grasshoppers are among the favored prey; but many other large insects are taken; including beetles; dragonflies; moths; caterpillars; others. Also feeds on mammals (including voles; mice; and sometimes bats); small birds (sometimes up to the size of quail); lizards; frogs; earthworms; spiders; crayfish; other items. ,During courtship displays; female flies slowly with stiff; fluttering wingbeats; the wings held just below horizontal. Male repeatedly flies high; calling; and then dives. Male brings food for female; passes it to her in flight. Nest site is in cavity; usually in dead tree or snag; sometimes in dirt bank or cliff; or in old magpie nest. In southwest; often in holes in giant cactus. Also uses artificial nest boxes. Sites usually 10-30' up; but may be at any height. 
American-Oystercatcher,Haematopus palliatus,Oystercatchers,Coastal beaches; tidal flats. Strictly coastal; in areas with extensive sand beaches; tidal mudflats; salt marsh. Key element is presence of good food supply; such as oyster beds; clam flats. May nest among dunes; on islands in salt marsh; or on dredge spoil islands.,Often forages by walking in shallow water; searching for food by sight. The birds have two methods of opening the shells of bivalves. In one; finding a mussel with its shell slightly open; the oystercatcher quickly jabs its bill into the opening; cutting the muscles and then cleaning out the contents. In the other method; the bird simply hammers on the shell to break it open.,1-4. Buffy gray; usually speckled with dark brown. Nests attended by two females and one male may have 5-6 eggs. Incubation is by both sexes; 24-28 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after they hatch. Both parents feed young for at least 2 months after hatching; although young may attempt to forage on their own well before parents stop feeding them. Age at first flight about 5 weeks.,Mostly shellfish and marine worms. Feeds mostly on mussels; clams; oysters; also marine worms; sand crabs; limpets; sea urchins; jellyfish; and other small creatures of the intertidal zone. ,First breeds at age of 3-4 years. Sometimes may mate for life. In areas with high populations; may form trios; with one male and two females attending one nest or two nearby nests. Nest site is on ground; on marsh island or among dunes; usually well above high tide mark. Nest (apparently built by both sexes) is shallow scrape in sand; sometimes lined with pebbles; shells. 
American-Pipit,Anthus rubescens,Wagtails and Pipits,Tundra; alpine slopes; in migration and winter; plains; bare fields; shores. Breeds on tundra; both in far north and in high mountains above treeline; in areas with very low growth such as sedges; grass; and dwarf willows. In migration and winter found on flat open ground such as plowed fields; short-grass prairie; mudflats; shores; river sandbars.,Forages by walking on the ground; taking insects from the ground or from low plants. Sometimes forages while walking in very shallow water. Except in the breeding season; usually forages in flocks.,4-6; sometimes 3-7. Whitish to pale buff; heavily spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by female only; 13-16 days. Male feeds female during incubation period. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Female broods young much of the time during first few days; male may bring food for her and for young. Young usually leave nest at about 14 days; are fed by parents for about another 2 weeks.,Mostly insects; also some seeds. Insects make up great majority of summer diet; included are many flies; true bugs; beetles; caterpillars; moths; and others. Also eats some spiders; millipedes; ticks. Migrants along coast may eat tiny crustaceans and marine worms. Inland in fall and winter; seeds of grasses and weeds may make up close to half of diet. ,Male performs song-flight display to defend nesting territory and attract a mate. In display; male begins singing on ground; flies up (often to 100' or more); then glides or parachutes down again with wings fully opened; singing all the way. Nest site is on ground in sheltered spot; usually protected under overhanging grass; small rock ledge; or piece of sod. Nest (built by female only) is a cup of grass; sedges; and weeds; lined with finer grass and sometimes with animal hair or feathers. 
American-Redstart,Setophaga ruticilla,Wood Warblers,Second-growth woods; river groves. Breeds in open deciduous and mixed woodland; preferring edges of forests or second growth. Attracted also to roadside trees; shrubby and tree-lined stream banks; and ponds. Will nest in second-growth maples; birch; and aspen following fire in coniferous forests. In the Northwest; prefers willow and alder thickets. In winter in the tropics; found in lowland woods.,Forages very actively; often flying out to catch insects in mid-air or hovering to take them from foliage. Flycatches much more than most warblers; drooping its wings; fanning its tail; and leaping high in the air. Males feed higher and make more mid-air sallies than do females early in the nesting season. Does not cling to tips of branches while hanging upside down as do many warblers. Holds large caterpillars and moths in the bill and bangs them on perch before eating.,4; sometimes 2-5. Off-white; with brown or gray marks. Incubation by female only; 11-12 days. Often parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave the nest at 9 days old. The parents divide the brood into 2 parts; each parent attending only half the fledglings. Normally 1 brood per season.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects including beetles; caterpillars; moths; leafhoppers; aphids; midges; crane flies; also spiders anddaddy longlegs. Also eats some seeds and berries. ,Males sometimes mate with more than one female and raise 2-3 broods simultaneously. Males perform a frequent boundary display flight toward rivals; with stiffened wingbeats and a glide back to the original perch in a semicircle. Male displays to female during courtship by fluffing plumage; raising crown feathers; spreading wings and tail; and bowing. Nest site picked by female; usually in fork of tree; 4-70' above the ground; rarely on the ground. Open cup nest (built by female) of plant fibers; grass; rootlets; decorated with lichen; birch bark; and feathers; lined with feathers. Sometimes will use old nests of other birds. 
American-Robin,Turdus migratorius,Thrushes,Cities; towns; lawns; farmland; forests; in winter; berry-bearing trees. Over most of continent; summers wherever there are trees for nest sites and mud for nest material. In arid southwest; summers mainly in coniferous forest in mountains; rarely in well-watered lowland suburbs. In winter; flocks gather in wooded areas where trees or shrubs have good crops of berries.,Does much foraging on the ground; running and pausing on open lawns; apparently locates earthworms by sight (not; as had been suggested; by hearing them move underground). When not nesting; usually forages in flocks.,Usually 4; sometimes 3-7. Pale blue or "robin's-egg blue."  Incubation by female; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed young; though female does more. Parents very aggressive in defense of nest. Young leave the nest about 14-16 days after hatching. Male may tend the fledged young while female begins second nesting attempt. 2 broods per season; sometimes 3.,Mostly insects; berries; earthworms. In early summer; insects make up majority of diet; also feeds on many earthworms; snails; spiders; other invertebrates. Feeds heavily on fruit; especially in winter (fruit accounts for perhaps 60% of diet year-round); mainly wild berries; also some cultivated fruits. Young are fed mostly on insects and earthworms. ,Males arrive before females on nesting grounds and defend territories by singing; sometimes by fighting. In early stages of courtship; female may be actively pursued by one or several males. Nest: Female does most of nest building with some help from male. Site on horizontal branch of tree or shrub; usually 5-25' above ground; rarely on ground or up to 70' high; also nests on ledges of houses; barns; bridges. Nest is a cup of grasses; twigs; debris; worked into solid foundation of mud; lined with fine grasses and plant fibers. 
American-Three-toed-Woodpecker,Picoides dorsalis,Woodpeckers,Conifer forests. Often closely associated with spruce; also found in pine; fir; tamarack; sometimes mixed with deciduous trees such as aspen or willow. Favors areas with many standing dead trees; as after fire or floods. May concentrate in areas with big infestations of wood-boring insects.,Forages on live or dead conifers; especially spruces. Often scales off flakes of bark to get at insects; and may gradually remove all bark from a dead tree. Members of a pair forage together at times; but usually separately while nesting.,4; sometimes 3-6. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 22-26 days after hatching; may remain with parents for another 4-8 weeks. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Diet is mainly wood-boring beetle larvae; also moth caterpillars and various other insects. Eats some fruit; and may visit sapsucker diggings to feed on sap. ,Same pairs may remain together for more than one season. Nest site is cavity in tree; typically dead conifer; sometimes in aspen; in live tree; or in utility pole. Cavity (new one each year; excavated by both sexes) usually 5-15' above ground; sometimes 2-50' up. Adult birds often quite unwary around nest; ignoring nearby observers. 
American-Tree-Sparrow,Spizelloides arborea,New World Sparrows,Arctic scrub; willow thickets; in winter; brushy roadsides; weedy edges; marshes. In summer most common near treeline; where northern forest gives way to tundra. May be in openings in stunted spruce forest; or on open tundra if a few taller shrubs are present. In winter in open fields; woodland edges; marshes; suburban areas.,Forages on ground or in low bushes; sometimes in trees up to 30' or more above ground. Except when nesting; usually forages in small flocks.,4-6; usually 5. Pale bluish or greenish; with brownish spotting often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; 11-13 days; male visits nest often; but does not incubate. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest at age 8-10 days; when flight feathers not yet fully grown. Parents may lure them away from nest by offering food. Young are able to fly at about 14-15 days after hatching; parents continue to feed them for about 2 more weeks. 1 brood per season; but may attempt to renest if 1st attempt fails.,Seeds and insects. Diet in winter is almost entirely seeds; from grasses; weeds; and other plants; also a few insects and berries. In summer eats mostly insects and other small invertebrates; plus a few seeds. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Pairs form shortly after birds arrive on breeding grounds. Male actively defends territory; chasing away other members of same species. Nest site is on or near ground; in grass clumps beneath shrubs. Sometimes on hummock in open tundra; rarely up to 4' above ground in willow or spruce. Nest is an open cup of twigs; grasses; moss; lined with fine grass and with feathers (usually ptarmigan feathers). Female builds nest in about 7 days. 
American-White-Pelican,Pelecanus erythrorhynchos,Pelicans,Lakes; marshes; salt bays. In breeding season mostly inland; nesting on isolated islands in lakes and feeding on shallow lakes; rivers; marshes. Feeding areas may be miles from nesting sites. Also breeds locally on coastal islands. Flocks in migration stop on lakes; rivers. Winters mainly along coast; on shallow; protected bays and estuaries; also on large lakes in warm climates.,Forages by swimming on surface; dipping bill into water and scooping up fish in pouch. During breeding season does much foraging at night; locating fish by touch during frequent dipping of bill; by day; probably locates prey visually. May forage cooperatively; lining up and driving fish toward shallower water.,NA,mostly fish. Primarily eats "rough" fish of little value to humans; also crayfish; salamanders. ,NA
American-Wigeon,Mareca americana,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; lakes; bays; fields. In summer mainly on inland marshes; especially larger marshes; not often at small ponds. In migration and winter on coastal estuaries; fresh or salt marshes; inland lakes and ponds. May winter on large deep lakes.,Versatile in foraging. Flocks often feed on land; feed in shallow water; taking items from surface or submerging head and neck; also associates with diving birds on deeper water; robbing them of their food when they come to the surface. May feed by day or night.,8-11; sometimes 5-12. Whitish. Incubation is by female only; 23-24 days. Male usually departs before eggs hatch. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching; feed themselves. Female remains with brood for much of their pre-flight stage. Young capable of flight 45-63 days after hatching.,Mostly plant material. Eats aquatic plants such as pondweeds; sedges; wild celery; eelgrass; algae. Also eats some insects and snails. On land; grazes on young grass shoots; and consumes seeds and waste grains. Very young ducklings eat many insects. ,Pair formation begins on wintering grounds; most older birds paired before spring migration. Several males often court one female. In one display; male extends neck forward with head low; bill open; while raising tips of folded wings; revealing white wing patches. Tends to begin nesting later in season than most dabblers. Nest site on dry land; sometimes on island; usually within 100' of water but sometimes up to 1/2 mile away; site concealed by tall vegetation. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression filled with grasses and weeds; lined with down. 
American-Woodcock,Scolopax minor,Sandpipers,Wet thickets; moist woods; brushy swamps. Favors a mix of forest and open fields; often spending day in the forest; night in the open. Mostly in deciduous or mixed woods with much young growth and moist soil; such as thickets along streams. At night may be in open pastures; abandoned farm fields; open swamp edges.,Feeds mostly by probing with bill in soft soil. Tip of bill is sensitive and flexible; allowing bird to detect and then grab creatures in the soil. Sometimes performs odd rocking motion while standing; possibly the vibration from this will disturb earthworms into moving; it has been suggested that the woodcock can hear sounds of creatures moving underground.,4; sometimes 1-3; rarely 5 or more (possibly resulting from more than one female laying in same nest). Eggs pinkish-buff; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is by female only; 20-22 days. Young: Downy young leave nest a few hours after hatching. Female tends young and feeds them. After a few days; young may begin probing in soil; learning to search for food. Young can make short flights at age 2 weeks; fly fairly well at 3 weeks; independent at about 5 weeks.,Mostly earthworms and insects. Earthworms are major prey at most times and places. Insects also important; especially insect larvae that burrow in soil; such as those of many beetles; crane flies; and others. Also eaten are millipedes; spiders; snails; and other invertebrates. Consumes some plant material; including seeds of grasses; sedges; smartweeds. ,Males display at night in spring and summer to attract females. Often several males are close together in meadow; brushy field. Male gives nasal beeping call on ground; then performs high; twisting flight display. In this "sky dance;" musical twittering sounds made by certain modified wing feathers; chirping calls made vocally. Female visits area; mates with one of the males. Male takes no part in caring for eggs or young. Nest site is on ground; usually in open woods or overgrown field; in area with many dead leaves. Nest (made by female) is a scrape lined with dead leaves; other debris. 
Ancient-Murrelet,Synthliboramphus antiquus,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Open ocean; sounds; rarely salt bays. Mostly on cool waters out of sight of land; sometimes concentrating over edge of continental shelf; may feed close to shore; especially in straits or near islands where tidal currents concentrate food near surface. Nests in burrows on islands with good cover of grass; shrubs; trees.,Forages while swimming underwater. Probably catches all food within about 60' of surface.,2; rarely 1. Pale buff or olive; spotted with brown. Incubation is by both parents; 29-37 days. Young: Not fed in nest. 1-3 days after eggs hatch; parents come to nest at night and call near entrance; young leave nest and scramble down to sea (often over 1000' through dense vegetation). Parents and young recognize each other by voice; reunite at sea and swim away from colony. Young are fed by parents until fully grown; at least 4 weeks.,Crustaceans; fish. Diet not well known; but euphausiid shrimp appears to be primary food for much of year; mainly those about 1" in length. At some seasons eats mostly very small fish; including sand lance; capelin; herring; smelt; saury; rockfishes; and shiner perch. ,Breeds in colonies on islands; active at colonies mostly at night. Males come ashore after dark and sing from high perches; such as tree branches or stumps; simple song of repeated chirps. Nest site is burrow in ground under trees or grass; usually on slope and close to sea. Burrow (excavated by both sexes) usually 2-5' long; nest chamber at end lined with twigs; grass; leaves. 
Anhinga,Anhinga anhinga,Anhingas,Cypress swamps; rivers; wooded ponds. Mostly on quiet and sheltered waters; such as freshwater marshes; slow-moving rivers through cypress swamps; inlets and lagoons lined with mangroves; lakes with standing dead trees.,Hunts for fish while swimming underwater or at surface. Not usually a fast swimmer; mostly waits for fish to come near; then impales them with lightning-fast thrust of long; pointed bill. Structure of neck is specially adapted for this kind of rapid thrust. Fish often tossed in air; then swallowed headfirst.,4; sometimes 2-5. Whitish to pale blue; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; 25-29 days. Young:  both parents feed young. After age of about 2 weeks; if young are disturbed; they will jump out of nest into water; at least sometimes; they are able to climb back up to nest. Young climb in nest tree using feet and bill. Age at first flight unknown.,Mostly fish. Feeds primarily on "rough" fish of little value to humans; including catfish; mullet; pickerel; sucker; gizzard shad. Also aquatic insects; crayfish; shrimp; sometimes snakes; baby alligators; small turtles. ,Sometimes nests in isolated pairs; usually in groups; in mixed colonies with herons; ibises; cormorants. Male chooses site in colony and displays there to attract mate. Displays include waving wings; raising tail up over back; pointing bill skyward and then bowing deeply. Nest:  built mostly by female; with material supplied by male. A platform of sticks; often lined with green leaves. Sometimes takes over an occupied nest of heron or egret. 
Annas-Hummingbird,Calypte anna,Hummingbirds,Gardens; chaparral; open woods. Found in a wide variety of habitats within its range; including streamside groves; chaparral; open oak woodland; coastal sage scrub; gardens; city parks. Most common in lowlands and lower mountain slopes; but may wander to high mountain meadows in late summer.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and take them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; 14-19 days. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar. Age of young at first flight about 18-23 days.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,May begin nesting in December; or even earlier. In courtship display; male hovers in midair; giving buzzy song; then flies much higher; he then dives steeply toward the female; making a loud explosive popping sound at the bottom of the dive. Also buzzes back and forth in front of female in short shuttling flights. Nest site is variable; usually on a branch of tree or shrub; sometimes in vines; on wires; under eaves. Usually 4-25 feet above ground; can be lower or higher. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of plant fibers and spider webs; lined with plant down and sometimes feathers; the outside camouflaged with lichens. 
Antillean-Nighthawk,Chordeiles gundlachii,Nightjars,Open areas. In Florida this nighthawk is concentrated around undeveloped open ground; such as airports vacant lots; fields. In the Caribbean it inhabits semi-open terrain including open woods; fields; farmland.,Similar to that of Common Nighthawk; catching insects during high; erratic flight.,1 or 2. White to pale cream; dotted with brown or gray. Incubation is probably by female only. Young: Probably fed by both parents.,Flying insects. ,Behavior is similar to that of Common Nighthawk; but the "booming" sound during the flight display is thinner and quieter. Nest site is on bare open ground; sometimes on flat gravel roofs. No nest built; eggs laid directly on flat surface. 
Aplomado-Falcon,Falco femoralis,Falcons,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Arctic-Loon,Gavia arctica,Loons,Lakes; ocean. In Alaskan breeding range found mainly on large lakes surrounded by open tundra. In winter on ocean; probably usually within a few miles of land.,Loons do their foraging by diving from the surface and swimming underwater. They often swim along the surface with their heads partly submerged; peering about underwater; watching for prey before they dive. They are propelled mainly by their feet; but may sometimes use their wings also when turning or in bursts of speed. Loons find their food by sight.,2; sometimes 1-3. Olive to brown; with blackish spots. Both sexes incubate (although female does more); 28-30 days. Young:  Leave nest shortly after hatching; return to nest for sleeping during first few nights; then sleep on water under parents' wings. Both parents feed young. Adults may fly several miles from nesting territory to other waters to eat and to bring back food for young. Age at first flight probably 60-65 days. One brood per year.,Mostly fish; but more varied in summer. In winter and on ocean eats mainly small fish; including gobies; sticklebacks; herrings; cod; and others. In breeding season; diet also includes crustaceans; mollusks; aquatic insects. Rarely eats frogs; leeches; small amounts of plant material. ,May mate for life. Courtship displays include ritualized bill-dipping and splash-diving by both members of pair. Nest:  Site is in shallow water; or on island or shore near water. Nest is a heap of vegetation; sometimes mixed with mud; may rarely build floating nest. Both sexes help build nest. 
Arctic-Tern,Sterna paradisaea,Gulls and Terns,Open ocean; rocky coasts; islands; in summer; also tundra lakes. At sea for most of year; in wide variety of situations; but seems to spend most time over cold waters and well offshore. Nests on islands; gravel beaches; coastal tundra; also far inland around lakes; rivers; ponds in tundra regions.,Forages mostly by flying slowly upwind; hovering briefly; then plunging to catch prey below water's surface. Sometimes dips down in flight to take items from surface; or chases flying insects in the air. Despite its small size; may steal food from other birds; swooping at them to startle them into dropping their catch.,1-3. Buff to pale olive; blotched with black and brown. Incubation is by both parents; 20-24 days. Parents are vigorous in defense of nest; will dive at and strike intruders. Young: Leave nest 1-3 days after hatching; find place to hide nearby. Both parents bring food for young. Age at first flight 21-28 days; young remain with parents another 1-2 months.,Fish; crustaceans; insects. Diet varies with season and location; mostly small fish and crustaceans; also many insects in summer on breeding grounds. Also known to eat mollusks; marine worms; earthworms; rarely berries. ,Usually first breeds at age of 3-4 years. Nests in colonies; sometimes with other terns. Much of courtship is aerial; with groups and pairs performing high flights. Male may fly over colony carrying fish; wings beating high above back. On ground; pair of birds posture; bow; strut in circles; male presents fish to female. Nest site is on ground in the open. Nest (built by both sexes) is a shallow scrape; usually lined with a few bits of plant material; debris. 
Arctic-Warbler,Phylloscopus borealis,Leaf-Warblers,Willow scrub. In Alaska; breeds in dense low thickets (4-10' tall) of willow; dwarf birch; or alder; mainly along streams. In Eurasia; breeds in similar habitat; but also in open forest of conifers mixed with deciduous shrubs.,Forages very actively among the foliage of bushes and trees; examining twigs and leaves for insects. Sometimes hovers to glean insects from foliage. Flies out to catch insects in mid-air; and may do so repeatedly when midges or mayflies are swarming.,6-7; sometimes 5. White; finely dotted with brown. Incubation is by female only; 11-13 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 12-14 days after hatching. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Diet in North America is not well known. In Eurasia; feeds on a wide variety of insects; especially beetles; mosquitoes; flies; leafhoppers; caterpillars; true bugs; mayflies; sawflies; also many others. Also eats some spiders and snails. ,Nesting behavior in Alaska not well known; information here includes data from Eurasia. Male sings to defend nesting territory; in aggressive encounters between males; they may flap wings slowly while singing. Nest site is on ground; usually in mossy ground cover under dense shrubs or in crevice among roots; sometimes tucked into side of grass tussock. Typically well hidden. Nest (thought to be built by female) is a domed structure with the entrance on the side; made of grass; weeds; moss; leaves; lined with fine grass. 
Arizona-Woodpecker,Dryobates arizonae,Woodpeckers,Oaks in mountains; pine-oak canyons. In its United States range (Arizona and New Mexico only) found exclusively in oaks of foothills and mid-levels of mountains; up into mixed pine-oak woods.,Forages by climbing oaks; pines; other trees; tapping and probing; flaking off bits of bark; searching for insects. Also climbs acrobatically among branches; sometimes hanging upside down; and probes at flowers of agaves and other plants. Male (slightly larger and longer-billed than female) spends more time foraging on trunk; female does more on branches and twigs.,3-4. White. Incubation is by both sexes; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Age at which young leave nest is not well known; young may follow parents for several weeks after fledging.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a variety of insects; especially larvae of wood-boring beetles; also some berries and small fruits; a few acorns. ,Birds may pair up and begin working on nest cavity by mid-winter. Members of pair may drum and tap near potential nest site; and make short gliding display flights nearby. Nest site is cavity in dead stub of large tree; usually 9-50' above ground; sometimes lower in agave stalk. In Arizona; nest cavity is often in walnut (easier to excavate than oak). Excavation is by male or by both sexes. 
Ash-throated-Flycatcher,Myiarchus cinerascens,Tyrant Flycatchers,Semi-arid country; deserts; brush; mesquites; pinyon-juniper; dry open woods. Found in a wide variety of lowland habitats; usually open and rather arid; avoiding mountains and forests. Often most common in mesquite groves; pinyon-juniper hillsides; and other open woods; it may live in wide-open grassland if nest sites are available. In winter; found along dense desert washes.,Forages mostly by flying out from a perch to hover and pick insects from foliage. Sometimes takes insects from trunks or branches; or from the ground; seldom catches them in mid-air. Usually feeds low. Will perch in shrubs or cactus to feed on fruits.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. Creamy white; blotched with brown and lavender. Incubation is by female only; about 15 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 14-16 days; parents feed young for at least several days after they fledge. Often raises 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds on insects; including caterpillars; beetles; grasshoppers; wasps; true bugs; and flies; also some as large as cicadas. Eats spiders; and rarely small lizards. Also feeds on fruits and berries; including those of desert mistletoe and saguaro cactus. Fruits of elephant-tree may be important in winter diet. ,Male's song; given in spring to defend nesting territory; is a simple repetition of the usual call notes. Nest site is usually in hole in tree or post; either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; 2-25' above the ground. In its range; often uses old holes made by Ladder-backed Woodpecker. Also will use holes in giant cactus or in agave stalks; and such sites as birdhouses; metal drain pipes; old Cactus Wren nests; and others. Nest (built by both sexes) is a mass of weeds; grass; twigs; rootlets; lined with softer material such as hair and feathers. 
Ashy-Storm-Petrel,Hydrobates homochroa,Northern Storm-Petrels,Open ocean. During summer; favors relatively cool waters of the California Current; feeding mainly just off the edge of the continental shelf. In fall; concentrates where deep waters of Monterey Submarine Canyon come relatively near shore in Monterey Bay. Nests on rocky islands with abundant crevices for nest sites.,Forages mostly by hovering or skimming low over water and taking items from surface; also will sit on water to feed. Probably forages mostly at dusk and at night.,One. White or with faint reddish-brown dots. Incubation is by both sexes; averages about 45 days. Young:  probably both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young leaves nest and goes to sea on average about 84 days after hatching.,Probably mostly crustaceans and small fish. Diet is not well known. Includes small fish; and crustaceans such as euphausiids. Once reported to feed heavily on the larval stage of spiny lobster off southern California. ,Breeds in colonies on offshore islands. Active at colonies only at night; arriving there just after dark and departing before first light. Some adults may visit colony every month of year. At Farallon Islands off central California; nesting is not synchronized; egg-laying may occur any time late April to mid-July; rarely to September. Before eggs are laid; both members of pair may spend time in nest chambers; giving trilling and twittering songs. Nest:  site is in natural cavity or crevice under rock piles; under driftwood; or in old burrow of other species; usually no nest lining added. 
Atlantic-Puffin,Fratercula arctica,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Coastal and offshore waters; open sea. Colonial; breeds in burrows and among rocks of sea islands. Favors cool or cold waters off North America. Outside of breeding season usually well offshore; even far out in mid-ocean. Nests on islands where nesting sites provided by soil for burrows or crevices among rocks.,Forages while swimming underwater. Does most foraging within 50' of surface; but can dive to about 200'.,One (rarely 2; probably laid by 2 females). White; sometimes faintly marked with brown; purple. Incubation is by both sexes (female may do more); 36-45 days; usually 39-42. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; carrying fish in bill; may feed fish directly to young at first; later drop them on floor of nest. Young leave nest usually 38-44 days after hatching; usually leave at night; flying directly out to sea.,Fish; crustaceans. Food brought to young in nest is mostly small fish; especially sand lance; herring; capelin; cod; many others. Diet of adults (especially in winter) poorly known; in addition to fish; may include many crustaceans (such as euphausiid shrimp; mysids; copepods) as well as mollusks and marine worms. ,Usually first breeds at about 5 years. Breeds in colonies. Birds often have same mates each year. In courtship; male repeatedly flicks head up and back so that bill points up; may continue for minutes. Members of pair swing bills sideways; clashing them together repeatedly. Nest site is in burrow 3-7' long; or in natural crevice or under rocks. Sometimes one entrance leads to side branches and multiple nests. Both sexes help excavate. Nest in chamber in burrow usually has sparse lining of grass; feathers. 
Audubons-Oriole,Icterus graduacauda,Blackbirds and Orioles,Woodlands; thickets. In our area; found in southern Texas in native woods near Rio Grande; also locally farther north in mesquite brushland and groves of live oak. In Mexico; often in foothills; in humid oak forest or in pine-oak woodland.,Forages rather quietly and deliberately in trees and shrubs; often staying within dense cover as it searches among the foliage for insects. Sometimes forages on the ground. Will visit flowers for nectar.,3-5. Pale grayish to bluish white; with brown and purple markings usually concentrated at larger end. Details of incubation are not well known. Young: Probably both parents feed the young; but details are poorly known.,Mostly insects and berries. Diet is not known in detail; but includes a variety of insects; also eats various berries; including those of hackberry. Sometimes takes nectar. ,Nesting behavior is not well known. Pairs may remain together on territory throughout the year. In Texas; most nesting activity is from late April through June. Nests are often parasitized by Bronzed Cowbirds. Nest site is in outer branches of a low tree; often a mesquite; 5-15' above the ground and firmly attached to upright twigs. Sometimes placed in a clump of Spanish moss. Nest is a hanging pouch or basket; not as deep as some oriole nests; with the rim firmly woven to the supporting twigs and the entrance somewhat constricted. Nest is made of long grass stems; woven while they are still green; lined with finer grass. 
Audubons-Shearwater,Puffinus lherminieri,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Almost exclusively over warm waters; follows warm current of Gulf Stream north. Very seldom comes near land in North America. Nests on islands; both along rocky coastal edges and in wooded areas farther inland.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; rowing with wings; may be quite agile underwater. Also feeds by seizing items at surface. Probably feeds by night as well as by day. Does not ordinarily follow ships like some seabirds.,One per season. White. Incubation is by both sexes; about 51 days. Young:  Chick is brooded or attended by one parent for several days after hatching. Both parents feed young; visiting at night. Last feeding of young is about 70 days after hatching; 3-5 days later; young departs from nest. Leaving at night; young climbs to highest point nearby; makes its first flight out to sea.,Squid; fish. Diet not well known; apparently mostly small squid and fish. Has been reported to eat many sardines at times. ,Breeds in colonies on islands. Active at colonies only at night. Adults may arrive at colony 3 months before time of egg-laying. Members of mated pair spend much time together at nest site; rubbing bills together; often calling loudly. Nest:  Site is in narrow natural crevice in rock; in underground burrow; or on ground under dense vegetation; usually with little or no nest lining added. 
Aztec-Thrush,Ridgwayia pinicola,Thrushes,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Bachmans-Sparrow,Peucaea aestivalis,New World Sparrows,Open pine or oak woods; palmetto scrub; bushy pastures. Favors relatively open grassy areas. Historically was most common in understory of mature pine forest; where frequent fires limited the amount of brush; as mature forest has become scarce; more Bachman's Sparrows are found in clearcuts; powerline rights-of-way; old pastures; and other open areas.,Forages almost entirely on the ground; moving rather slowly in a limited area. Picks up items from ground or jumps up to take items from low vegetation.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. White; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents bring food to the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-10 days after hatching. 1-2 broods per year; perhaps rarely 3.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet is not known in detail. In summer; majority of diet apparently is insects; especially beetles; caterpillars; grasshoppers; also other insects and spiders. Also eats many seeds; particularly those of grasses; seeds may be especially important in diet in winter. ,In southern areas; members of a pair may remain together at all seasons. Beginning in early spring; male sings to defend nesting territory. Nest site is almost always on the ground; typically placed at the base of a shrub; clump of grass; or palmetto. Occasionally placed a few inches above the ground; within the base of a weed or grass clump. Nest (built by female) is an open cup made of grass; weeds; rootlets; lined with fine grass and animal hair. Often has a domed top of woven grasses at least partially covering nest. 
Bahama-Mockingbird,Mimus gundlachii,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Baikal-Teal,Sibirionetta formosa,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Bairds-Sandpiper,Calidris bairdii,Sandpipers,Rainpools; mudflats; shores; fields. In migration; often chooses slightly drier or more open habitats than related small sandpipers: dry and sandy shores; nearby grassy areas; even open fields. Also found on mudflats; flooded fields. Breeds on dry upland tundra in Arctic.,Forages mostly by picking items from surface; not by probing; moves about actively on flats; looking for insects and other prey.,Usually 4; sometimes fewer. Pinkish-buff to olive; blotched with dark brown. Incubation is by both parents; 19-22 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Young are tended by both parents at first; but female may depart before male. Age of young at first flight about 16-20 days.,Mostly insects. Diet not well known. On northern breeding grounds; eats many insects; especially flies and beetles; also spiders; other invertebrates. During migration; feeding in drier habitats; probably continues to feed mostly on insects; including caterpillars. Also takes some amphipods and other crustaceans. ,Male flies high over breeding habitat in slow hovering flight; fluttering wings continuously; giving trilled song. At beginning of breeding season; males may tend to be clustered fairly close together; perhaps to help in attracting females to area. Nest site is on ground on dry tundra; in area with rocks and only low ground cover. May be well hidden under grass clump. Nest (probably built mostly by male) is a shallow scrape; lined with lichens; grass; dry leaves. 
Bairds-Sparrow,Centronyx bairdii,New World Sparrows,Mostly native prairies. Breeds mainly in northern prairies with fairly tall grass and with scattered tall weeds or low bushes; also sometimes nests in fields of wheat or other crops. In migration and winter found mostly on shortgrass prairie and in weedy fields.,Forages on the ground; moving about rather slowly among grass clumps. Almost always forages alone.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Grayish white; heavily spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by the female only; about 11-12 days. Young: Both parents feed young (but the female may do more at first). Young leave the nest after about 8-10 days; before they are able to fly; and are fed by their parents for at least another 1-2 weeks. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Diet varies with season. In summer feeds mainly on insects; including grasshoppers; caterpillars; moths; beetles; leafhoppers; and others; as well as spiders and seeds. Young birds are fed mostly grasshoppers and caterpillars. Diet at other seasons is mostly seeds of weeds and grasses. ,May nest in small; loose colonies. To defend nesting territory; male sings from the top of a tall grass stem; weed; or low bush. Courtship display of male may involve walking on ground; fluttering one wing at a time over his back; repeatedly bowing. Nest site is on the ground in a grassy area; well hidden and hard to find. Usually in a slight depression so the rim of the nest is level with the ground; sometimes tucked under a dense overhanging grass clump or built within the base of such a clump. Nest (probably built by the female) is a shallow open cup made of dry grass; sometimes with some weeds added; may be lined with fine grass; animal hair; moss. 
Bald-Eagle,Haliaeetus leucocephalus,Hawks and Eagles,Coasts; rivers; large lakes; in migration; also mountains; open country. Typically close to water; also locally in open dry country. Occurs in a variety of waterside settings where prey is abundant; including swamps in Florida; edges of conifer forest in southeastern Alaska; treeless islands in Aleutians; desert rivers in Arizona. Also winters in some very dry western valleys.,Opportunistic; sometimes a predator; sometimes a scavenger. Does much hunting by watching from a high perch; then swooping down to catch prey in its talons. Also hunts by cruising very low over sea or land; taking prey by surprise. Where fish are abundant (as at spawning runs); may wade in shallow water to pursue them. Sometimes steals fish from Ospreys or other birds. Also lands on ground to feed on carrion.,2; sometimes 1-3. White. Incubation is by both parents; 34-36 days. ,Mostly fish when available; also birds; mammals. Feeds heavily on fish in many areas; including herring; salmon; carp; catfish; many others. When fish are scarce; may eat birds (ducks; coots; auklets; others) or mammals (jackrabbits; muskrats; others). Sometimes eats turtles; crabs; shellfish; other items. Often feeds on carrion; when fish or carrion readily available; may catch few birds or mammals. ,Usually first breeds at age 4-5 years; and may mate for life. Nest site is usually in tree; often on cliff in west; or on ground on northern islands. Tree nests are usually in very tall tree; standing above surrounding forest; up to 180' or more above ground. Nest (built by both sexes) usually a mound of sticks; lined with finer materials; nest may be reused and added to for years; becoming huge. Great Horned Owls sometimes take over nests. 
Baltimore-Oriole,Icterus galbula,Blackbirds and Orioles,Open woods; riverside groves; elms; shade trees. Breeds in deciduous or mixed woodland; generally in open woods or edges rather than interior of dense forest. May be common in trees in towns. Often favors elms. Winters mostly in the tropics around forest edge and semi-open country.,Forages by searching for insects among foliage of trees and shrubs. Sometimes flies out to catch insects in midair. Visits flowers for nectar; and will come to sugar-water feeders; also will come to pieces of fruit put out at feeders.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Bluish white to pale gray; with brown and black markings concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 12-14 days after hatching.,Insects; berries; nectar. In summer feeds mostly on insects; especially caterpillars; including hairy types avoided by many birds; also eats beetles; grasshoppers; wasps; bugs; and others; plus spiders and snails. Eats many berries and sometimes cultivated fruit. Feeds on nectar and will take sugar-water. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. In courtship; male faces female and stretches upright; then bows deeply with tail spread and wings partly open. Nest site is in tall deciduous tree; placed near end of slender drooping branch; usually 20-30' above the ground but can be 6-60' up or higher. Nest (built by female; sometimes with help from male) is a hanging pouch; with its rim firmly attached to a branch. Nest is tightly woven of plant fibers; strips of bark; grapevines; grass; yarn; string; Spanish moss; lined with fine grass; plant down; hair. 
Bananaquit,Coereba flaveola,Tanagers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Band-rumped-Storm-Petrel,Hydrobates castro,Northern Storm-Petrels,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Band-tailed-Pigeon,Patagioenas fasciata,Pigeons and Doves,Oak canyons; foothills; chaparral; mountain forests. Mainly in wooded or semi-open habitats; moves around to take advantage of changing food supplies. Breeds in oak woodland along the coast and in mountains; also in pine-oak woods and fir forest. May forage along streams in lowland desert. Increasingly regular in suburban areas on Pacific Coast.,Will forage on ground or in trees. Can climb about with great agility in small branches; even hanging upside down to reach berries. Usually forages in flocks; even during breeding season.,1; sometimes 2. White. Incubation is by both parents; 18-20 days. Young: Both parents feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest about 25-30 days after hatching; are tended by parents for some time thereafter. 2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Mostly nuts; seeds; berries. Diet shifts with season. Acorns are major part of diet when available. Eats many berries; including those of elderberry; manzanita; juniper; wild grape; many others. Also eats seeds; tender young spruce cones; buds; young leaves; flowers; occasionally insects. ,Several pairs may nest close together in loose colony. In courtship; male flies up and then glides in a wide circle; giving a wheezing call and fluttering wings toward end of glide. On perch; male coos with chest and neck puffed up; tail lowered and spread. Nest site is in coniferous or deciduous tree; usually 15-40' above ground; can be lower or much higher. Placed on fork of horizontal branch or at base of branch against trunk. Nest is a bulky but loosely-built platform of sticks; male brings material; female builds. 
Bank-Swallow,Riparia riparia,Swallows,Near water; fields; marshes; streams; lakes. Typically seen feeding in flight over (or near) water at all seasons; even in migration. Nests in colonies in vertical banks of dirt or sand; usually along rivers or ponds; seldom away from water.,Feeds almost entirely in flight. Often forages in flocks; and typically flies rather low; doing much feeding over water. Rarely feeds on ground; mainly in severe weather.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. White. Incubation is by both parents; 14-16 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 18-24 days after hatching.,Insects. Feeds on a wide variety of flying insects. Eats many flies (including house flies and crane flies); beetles; wasps; winged ants; small bees; and true bugs; plus some dragonflies; stoneflies; moths; caterpillars; and others. ,Almost always nests in colonies in vertical banks of sand or dirt; may be along riverbanks; lake shores; road cuts; gravel pits; or similar sites. Often dense colonies; with entrances to holes no more than a foot apart. All the pairs in a colony may be synchronized in timing of their nesting activities. Nest site is in burrow excavated in steep bank. Both sexes help dig burrow; beginning by clinging to bank and digging with bill; later crawling inside burrow and kicking out dirt with feet. Burrows usually 2-3' long; sometimes 1-5' long. Nest at end of horizontal burrow is made of grass; weeds; rootlets; with a lining of feathers added after eggs are laid. 
Bar-tailed-Godwit,Limosa lapponica,Sandpipers,Mudflats; shores; tundra. In Alaska; nests on rolling hills of tundra; on slopes with hummocky ground cover and low stunted shrubs; a habitat shared with Whimbrels; adults may feed on coastal lagoons some distance from nesting sites. In migration and winter mainly on tidal mudflats along coast.,Forages by probing in mud of exposed flats or in shallow water. Females have longer bills and may feed in deeper water than males.,Usually 4. Olive or pale brown; usually with a few brown spots. Incubation begins with laying of last egg; both male and female incubate; and eggs hatch in about 3 weeks. Young: Shortly after hatching; young are led to nearby marshy areas; where they stay until able to fly. Both parents tend young; and young find all their own food. Age at first flight probably about 30 days. One brood per year.,Includes insects; crustaceans; mollusks. In summer in Alaska; feeds mainly on aquatic insects; also occasionally seeds and berries. On mudflats and shores at other seasons; feeds on crustaceans; mollusks; insects; annelid worms. ,First breeds at age of two years. Territorial and courtship display of male involves loud calls and aerial acrobatics; deep wingbeats alternating with glides; as he circles high above tundra. Nest site is usually on a raised hummock; surrounded by grass. Nest is a shallow depression; lined with bits of grass; moss; lichens. 
Barn-Owl,Tyto alba,Barn Owls,Woodlands; groves; farms; barns; towns; cliffs. Typically in open or semi-open country in lowlands. May nest in forest or city if nearby area has good open foraging territory; such as farmland; marsh; prairie; desert.,Hunts at night; seldom by day. Seeks prey mostly by flying low over open ground; watching and listening; sometimes hunts by flying down from a perch. Has excellent vision in low light levels; and hearing is so precise that it can strike prey in total darkness.,Usually 3-8; sometimes 2-12 or even more. Whitish; sometimes becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by female only; 29-34 days; male brings food to female during incubation. Young: Female remains with young at first and broods them while they are small; male brings food; female feeds it to young. After about 2 weeks; female hunts also. Age of young at first flight roughly 55-65 days. Young return to sleep at nest or nearby for several more weeks. 1-2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Mostly rodents. Feeds heavily on voles; also takes various kinds of mice; small rats; shrews; young rabbits; other mammals. Eats very small numbers of birds; lizards; insects; rarely frogs or even fish. ,In courtship; male performs display flight; including loud wing-claps; male feeds female. Nest: Uses sites in caves and hollow trees; also many artificial sites such as barn lofts; church steeples; abandoned houses; dry wells; crevices under bridges; nest boxes. Where no existing cavities available; will dig holes in dirt banks. No real nest built; but will arrange debris into crude depression. 
Barn-Swallow,Hirundo rustica,Swallows,Open or semi-open land; farms; fields; marshes; lakes. May occur in any kind of open or partly open terrain; especially near water; generally avoiding very dry country and unbroken forest. Often breeds around farms; buildings; towns; and forages over fields or ponds.,Food is mostly captured and eaten in the air. Often forages quite low over water or fields. In bad weather; may sometimes feed on the ground.,4-5; sometimes 6; rarely 7. White; spotted with brown. Incubation is by both sexes (female does more); 13-17 days. Young: Both parents feed young. One or two additional birds; the pair's offspring from previous broods; may attend the nest and sometimes feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 18-23 days after hatching. 1 or 2 broods per year.,Insects. Feeds on a wide variety of flying insects; especially flies (including house flies and horse flies); beetles; wasps; wild bees; winged ants; and true bugs. Also eats some moths; damselflies; grasshoppers; and other insects; and a few spiders and snails. Only occasionally eats a few berries or seeds. ,Courtship involves aerial chases. On perch; mated pair sit close together; touch bills; preen each other's feathers. Several pairs may nest in same immediate area; but does not form dense colonies like some swallows. Nest: Original natural sites were in sheltered crevices in cliffs or shallow caves. Sites used today are mostly in open buildings; under eaves; under bridges or docks; or similar places. Nest (built by both sexes) is a cup of mud and dried grass; lined with feathers. 
Barnacle-Goose,Branta leucopsis,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Barred-Owl,Strix varia,Superb Owls,Woodlands; wooded river bottoms; wooded swamps. Favors mostly dense and thick woods with only scattered clearings; especially in low-lying and swampy areas. Most common in deciduous or mixed woods in southeast; but in north and northwest may be found in mature coniferous trees.,Hunts by night or day; perhaps most at dawn and dusk. Seeks prey by watching from perch; also by flying low through forest; may hover before dropping to clutch prey in talons.,2-3; rarely 4. White. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 28-33 days; male brings food to incubating female. Young: Female may remain with young much of time at first; while male hunts and brings back food for her and for young. Age of young at first flight about 6 weeks.,Mostly small mammals. Eats many mice and other small rodents; also squirrels (including flying squirrels); rabbits; opossums; shrews; other small mammals. Also eats various birds; frogs; salamanders; snakes; lizards; some insects. May take aquatic creatures such as crayfish; crabs; fish. ,Courtship involves both male and female bobbing and bowing heads; raising wings; and calling while perched close together. Male may feed female in courtship. Members of pair often call in duet. Nest site is in large natural hollow in tree; broken-off snag; or on old nest of hawk; crow; or squirrel. Rarely nests on ground. In east; often uses old Red-shouldered Hawk nest; hawk and owl may use same nest in alternate years. 
Barrows-Goldeneye,Bucephala islandica,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; ponds. In winter; coastal waters; rivers. Breeds on cold inland waters; such as small lakes; rivers; beaver ponds; mostly in forested country but also in open terrain. In winter mainly on shallow; protected coastal waters; such as bays and estuaries. May winter far inland on lakes and rivers; even in very cold regions where hot springs keep water open.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; rarely by dabbling in shallow water.,7-10; sometimes 5-14. Pale olive to blue-green. Incubation is by female; 28-34 days. Female covers eggs with down when leaving nest. Young: leave nest 1-2 days after hatching; are led to water by female. Young are tended by female; but feed themselves. Age at first flight about 8 weeks.,varies with season and habitat. On fresh water eats mainly aquatic insects; such as larvae of dragonflies and caddisflies. At sea eats mostly crustaceans and mollusks. Also eats much plant material; especially pondweeds; mainly in summer and fall. ,Pairs are formed mostly in winter. Several males may court one female in communal display on water. Displays of male include a circular pumping action of the head; also turning head from side to side; flapping wings. Nest: Female selects nest site and may re-use it for several years. Sites are mainly in large tree cavities; also in rock crevices; abandoned buildings; burrows; or on ground under bushes in treeless country. Will also use nest boxes. Nest is shallow depression lined with down and sometimes other materials. 
Bay-breasted-Warbler,Setophaga castanea,Wood Warblers,Woodlands; conifers in summer. Usually breeds in northern coniferous forest; in thick stands of spruce and fir. Where spruce is not found; will nest in deciduous or mixed second-growth woods of birches; maples; firs; and pines. In winter in the tropics; occurs in forest edge; second growth; and open woodland.,Appears more sluggish in foraging than do other Dendroica warblers feeding in the same spruce forests. Forages in and out along branches; mostly at mid-levels in trees. Rarely catches flying insects in mid-air. In winter in the tropics; joins mixed foraging flocks in the forest canopy.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. Off-white; with brown or black marks at larger end. Incubated by female; 12-13 days. Female is fed on the nest by the male during incubation. Tends to lay more eggs in years of spruce budworm outbreaks; when food is abundant. Rarely parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest 11-12 days after hatching.,Mostly insects; berries. In breeding season; eats a variety of insects; including beetles; flies; moths; caterpillars; leafhoppers; and grasshoppers; also Virginia creeper berries and mulberries. May eat many spruce budworms when that insect is at epidemic numbers. In winter in the tropics; also eats many berries. ,Males may not arrive on breeding grounds until early June. Nest site is on a horizontal branch of a dense spruce; hemlock; birch; or other tree; 4-40' above the ground. Nest is a large; open cup; either loosely built or compact; made of grasses; lichens; roots; mosses; and protruding conifer twigs; lined with bark strips and hair. 
Bells-Sparrow,Artemisiospiza belli,New World Sparrows,Coastal sage scrub; chaparral; in winter; also deserts. Found year-round in unique sage scrub habitat on the California coastal slope and foothills. In the interior; also breeds in saltbush; chamise; and other low shrubs of arid flats. In winter some spread eastward into open flats and deserts with scattered brush. ,Forages mostly on the ground; picking up items from the soil or from plant stems; sometimes scratching with its feet. Also does some feeding up in low bushes. When not nesting; may forage in small flocks.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Bluish white to pale blue; variably spotted or blotched with brown; gray; and black. Incubation lasts about 13-16 days. ,Mostly seeds and insects. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including grasshoppers; beetles; true bugs; and others; also spiders. Also eats many seeds of weeds; grasses; and shrubs. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male returns to same nesting territory each year; defends it by singing from a raised perch. Nest site is usually in low shrub; less than 4' above the ground. Sometimes placed on the ground under a shrub. Nest is a bulky open cup; made of twigs; sticks; lined with fine dry grass; weeds; sometimes animal hair. 
Bells-Vireo,Vireo bellii,Vireos,Willows; streamsides. Breeds in low dense growth; especially in second-growth scrub or brushy fields in Midwest; streamside thickets in Southwest; but also locally in chaparral; woodland edges; or scrub oaks. Winters in the tropics in dense low scrub; mostly near water.,Usually forages in low brush; within 12' of ground; but occasionally will feed much higher. Searches for insects among foliage; sometimes hovering while picking items from leaves or twigs; occasionally flies out to catch insects in mid-air.,3-5; usually 4. White; usually with dots of brown or black concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by both parents (but females do more); about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 11-12 days after hatching; are fed by parents for at least another 3 weeks.,Mostly insects. In breeding season; feeds almost entirely on insects; especially large ones; including caterpillars; stink bugs; wasps; bees; and weevils; also many others. Eats some spiders; and a very few berries. Winter diet unknown. ,Male defends nesting territory with incessant singing. In courtship; male may chase female; members of pair often posture and display to each other during early stages of nest building. Nest site is in low shrub or sapling; usually 2-5' above the ground and placed in a fork of a horizontal twig. Nest (built by both sexes) is a small hanging cup; its rim firmly woven into fork; made of grass; weeds; plant fibers; leaves; and strips of bark; bound with spiderwebs. Inside may be padded with feathers; plant down; moss; then lined with fine grass. Spider egg cases often added to outside. 
Belted-Kingfisher,Megaceryle alcyon,Kingfishers,Streams; lakes; bays; coasts; nests in banks. During winter and migration; may be found in almost any waterside habitat; including the edges of small streams and ponds; large rivers and lakes; marshes; estuaries; and rocky coastlines; seems to require only clear water for fishing. During breeding season; more restricted to areas with suitable dirt banks for nesting holes.,Forages by plunging headfirst into water; capturing fish near surface with bill. Watches for fish from branch; wire; rock; or other perch above water; or may hover above water before diving. Bones; scales; and other indigestible parts of prey are coughed up later as pellets.,6-7; sometimes 5-8. White. Incubation is by both sexes; 22-24 days. Female incubates at night; with male taking over early in morning; male may or may not do less of incubation than female. Young: Both parents feed young; at first giving them partially digested fish; later whole fish. Male may make more feeding visits than female. Young depart from nest 27-29 days after hatching; are fed by parents for about another 3 weeks. 1 brood per year; perhaps sometimes 2 in south.,Mostly small fish. Typically feeds on small fish; usually those less than 4-5" long. Also eats crayfish; frogs; tadpoles; aquatic insects. Occasionally takes prey away from water; including small mammals; young birds; lizards. Reported to eat berries at times. ,In courtship display; male brings fish; feeds it to female. Nest site is in steep or vertical dirt bank; usually with higher content of sand than clay. Both sexes take part in digging a long horizontal tunnel with nest chamber at end. Tunnel is generally 3-6' long and usually slopes upward from entrance. Rarely nests in tree cavity. Usually no lining added to nest chamber; but debris and undigested fish bones and scales may accumulate. 
Bendires-Thrasher,Toxostoma bendirei,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Desert; farmland; cholla; thorny bushes. Lives in various kinds of dry; semi-open habitats. Perhaps most common in Sonoran desert with variety of shrubs and cholla cactus and with some understory of grass. Also found where dense hedges or shrubs are next to farmland; and in grassland with scattered shrubs and yuccas.,Forages mostly on the ground. Picks up insects from the surface; or uses its bill to scratch or dig slightly in the soil or to turn over rocks or other items. Has a small bill; and does not dig as effectively as most thrashers.,Usually 3; sometimes 4; rarely 5. Whitish to pale gray-green; blotched with brown and buff. Incubation period and role of the parents in incubation are poorly known. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 12 days after hatching. 2 broods per year; perhaps rarely 3.,Mostly insects; some seeds and berries. Feeds mainly on insects; especially ants; termites; beetles; antlions; grasshoppers; and others; also spiders. Also feeds on seeds of grasses and other plants; various berries; and cactus fruits; including those of giant saguaro. ,Male sings in spring and summer to defend nesting territory. Nest: Usually placed in dense low shrub; tree; or cactus; commonly in cholla; yucca; mesquite; acacia; desert hackberry; also in other low growth; usually 3-10' above the ground. Nest is typically a bit smaller; more compact; and made of finer materials than the nests of most thrashers; usually has outer layer of twigs; inner layer of soft material such as grass; rootlets; feathers; animal hair. 
Berylline-Hummingbird,Amazilia beryllina,Hummingbirds,Mountain forests; canyons. Arizona occurrences have been mostly at 5;000-7;000 feet in mountains; in open pine-oak woods or among sycamores in shady canyons. In Mexico; occurs widely in foothills and lower slopes of mountains; especially in oak woodlands.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; probably more than 2 weeks. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar. Age of young at first flight about 18-20 days.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. In Arizona; has nested during the summer rainy season. Nest site is in deciduous tree or shrub; sometimes in a coniferous tree. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of grasses; moss; plant fibers; spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged with flakes of green lichen. 
Bewicks-Wren,Thryomanes bewickii,Wrens,Thickets; underbrush; gardens. In the west; found in many brushy or wooded habitats at lower elevations; including undergrowth in woods of oak and pine; streamside groves; chaparral; desert washes; suburban areas. In the east (where now scarce); mostly in brushy areas around the edges of woods.,Forages very actively by climbing and hopping about on trunks; branches; and twigs of trees; probing into bark crevices or gleaning insects from the surface. Also feeds on the ground; flipping over leaves and probing among leaf litter.,5-7; sometimes 4-11. White; with brown and gray blotches often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is probably by female only; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 2 weeks after hatching.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; ants; wasps; true bugs; caterpillars; grasshoppers; and many others. Also eats many spiders; and occasionally some berries or seeds. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing; songs of eastern birds quite different from those of the west. Adults sometimes puncture eggs of other birds nesting nearby. Nest site is in any kind of cavity; including natural hollows in trees; old woodpecker holes; also in manmade sites; including nest boxes; holes in buildings; mailboxes; tin cans; and many others. Site is usually less than 20' above the ground. Male may build incomplete "dummy" nests; female probably chooses site and completes one nest for raising young. Nest has a foundation of twigs; leaves; bark strips; and trash; topped with a softer cup of moss; leaves; animal hair; feathers. Sometimes adds bits of snakeskin to nest. 
Bicknells-Thrush,Catharus bicknelli,Thrushes,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Black-Francolin,Francolinus francolinus,Pheasants and Grouse,Thick vegetation; brushy areas and tall grasslands; generally near water. Inhabits mosaic areas where forests and cultivated lands meet; but is not an interior forest bird. More closely associated with water than many other partridges.,NA,NA,NA,NA
Black-Guillemot,Cepphus grylle,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Inshore waters of ocean; breeds on rocky shores; islands. Usually close to shore in shallow waters; but may be far offshore; especially around edges of pack ice. Sometimes feeds on freshwater lakes near coast. Nests along rocky shores; low cliffs; among debris on beaches.,Forages while swimming underwater. Most foraging within 30' of surface; may rarely dive more than 100'.,1-2. Whitish to pale blue-green; spotted with black; brown; gray. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-39 days. Young: Both parents feed young; carrying fish in bill to nest. Young depart from nest 31-50 days after hatching; before able to fly; scramble down to water alone; apparently independent after leaving.,Varies with place and season. May include more fish in southern part of range; more crustaceans farther north. Fish in diet (mainly those living near bottom in shallow waters) include butterfish; blennies; sculpins; gobies; sand lance; cod; many others. Crustaceans include crabs; shrimps; mysids; amphipods; copepods; isopods. Also eats some mollusks; insects; marine worms; bits of plant material. ,Usually first breeds at age of 4 years. Nests as isolated pairs or in colonies. May perform communal display: one or several birds strut with high-stepping walk; neck upstretched; may assume similar posture in water; leading to chases and diving. Members of pair face each other and bob heads; calling; sometimes touching bills. Nest site is in boulder pile; crevice near base of cliff; under driftwood or debris; usually close to water; rarely more than mile inland. Pair may re-use same site each year. Nest is thin layer of pebbles or debris; sometimes mere scrape in soil. 
Black-Noddy,Anous minutus,Gulls and Terns,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Black-Oystercatcher,Haematopus bachmani,Oystercatchers,Rocky coasts; sea islets. Found at all seasons along rocky shorelines; especially on small offshore islands where predators are fewer; chooses areas with abundant shellfish and other marine life. In winter; also commonly found on mudflats close to rocky coastlines; but uses mudflats less in summer.,Forages mostly near low tide; resting at high tide. When feeding on mussel beds; typically removes the mussel from its shell and leaves the shell in place. The birds have two methods of opening the shells of bivalves. In one; finding a mussel with its shell slightly open; the oystercatcher quickly jabs its bill into the opening; cutting the muscles and then cleaning out the contents. In the other method; the bird simply hammers on the shell to break it open.,2-3; sometimes 1. Pale buff to olive; spotted and scrawled with brown and black. Incubation is by both parents; 24-29 days. Young: Downy young remain near nest at first; parents take turns guarding the young and going to get food for them; walking back and forth to nearby intertidal zone. Older chicks follow their parents to feeding areas and are fed by them there. Young can fly at age 5 weeks or older; begin to catch some of their own food then; but are still fed by parents for some time thereafter.,Mostly mussels; limpets; other shellfish. Diet varies with place and season; but feeds mostly on mussels where they are abundant; also limpets; whelks; urchins; crabs; marine worms; beetle larvae. Young birds; newly independent; may eat fewer mussels at first; perhaps lacking the skill to open them. ,May mate for life. Almost always nests on islands. Pairs typically defend a breeding territory that includes both an elevated area for nesting; well above high tide; and an adjacent feeding area with mussels beds or other food source. Nest site is on ground well above high-tide mark; on gravel; grassy area; or depression in rock. Nest (built by both sexes) is slight scrape; with sparse lining of pebbles; pieces of shell. 
Black-Phoebe,Sayornis nigricans,Tyrant Flycatchers,Shady streams; walled canyons; farmyards; towns; near water. Occurs in a variety of semi-open habitats. Rarely found away from vicinity of water; which may be natural streams or ponds; or irrigation ditches or even water troughs; water ensures the availability of mud for nests.,Forages by watching from a perch and darting out to catch insects; often just above water. Catches insects in mid-air; or may hover while picking them from foliage or sometimes from water's surface. May also take insects from the ground; especially in cool weather. Indigestible parts of insects are coughed up as pellets. Male and female maintain separate feeding territories in winter.,4; sometimes 3-6. White; some (thought to be the last laid) may have reddish-brown dots. Incubation is by female only; 15-17 days. Young: Fed by both parents. May leave nest 2-3 weeks after hatching. Usually 2 broods per year; rarely 3.,Almost entirely insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects including beetles; grasshoppers; crickets; wild bees; wasps; flies; moths; caterpillars. Occasionally eats small fish. ,In courtship; male performs song-flight display; fluttering in the air with rapidly repeated calls; then descending slowly. Nest: Mud nests are usually plastered to sheltered spot such as cliff face; bridge support; culvert; or under eaves of building. Occasionally in well a few feet below ground level. Often returns to same nesting site year after year. Nest (probably built by female) is an open cup; semi-circular if attached to vertical wall; circular if placed on flat beam. Nest is made of mud mixed with grass and weeds; lined with soft materials such as plant fibers; rootlets; hair. 
Black-Rail,Laterallus jamaicensis,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Tidal marshes and salicornia on coast; grassy marshes inland. Favors very shallow water; or damp soil with scattered puddles. In coastal marsh; upper limits of highest tides; inland; mostly wet meadows. Found in dense stands of spartina and other grasses; salicornia; rushes; sedges.,Foraging behavior poorly known. Although the birds often call late at night; they apparently feed mostly by day while walking through marsh.,3-13; usually 6-8. White to pale buff; dotted with brown. Eastern race may tend to lay more eggs than western race. Incubation is by both sexes; 17-20 days. Young: Downy young leave nest within a day after hatching. Both parents probably care for young and feed them; details of development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Insects; snails; seeds. Probably a generalized feeder on small items in its habitat. Feeds on wide variety of insects; including aquatic beetles. Also eats spiders; snails; small crustaceans. Eats many seeds of bulrush and other marsh plants; especially in winter. ,Nesting behavior not thoroughly studied. Nest site is usually a couple of inches above ground or shallow water in a clump of vegetation; often at a spot slightly higher than surrounding marsh. Nest is a well-constructed cup of marsh plant material; usually with a domed top woven over it. A ramp of dead vegetation leads from nest entrance down to ground. Adults may continue to add to nest; building it up to higher level; in areas where nest might be threatened by high tides. 
Black-Rosy-Finch,Leucosticte atrata,Finches,Rocky summits; alpine snowfields and tundra; winters in open country at lower levels. Breeds on barren tundra of mountain peaks; mostly in rocky areas and often near persistent snowfields. Winters in open country of mountains and nearby valleys; often coming into towns.,NA,4-5; sometimes 3. White; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings; although the female may do most of it at first. Young probably leave the nest about 20 days after hatching; are fed by their parents for at least another 2 weeks. 1 brood per year.,FEEDING. Diet and feeding behavior are very similar to those of Gray-crowned Rosy-Finch,Males apparently outnumber females; and during the breeding season a male who has a mate usually attends her closely to keep rival males away. Nest: Located in a well-protected site in a crevice or hole in a cliff; usually in an inaccessible place; sometimes in a niche among boulders of a rockslide. Nest (built by female) is a bulky open cup of grass and moss; lined with fine grass; animal hair; and sometimes feathers. 
Black-Scoter,Melanitta americana,Ducks and Geese,Seacoasts; in summer; coastal tundra. Breeding habitat includes low-lying wet tundra and higher slopes in treeless terrain; also openings around lakes in northern forest. In winter mostly on bays and along exposed coastlines; usually over shallow water within a mile of shore. Migrants stop on Great Lakes and other fresh waters; some remaining for winter.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled by feet; wings may be folded or partly opened.,7-8; sometimes 5-11. Whitish to pale buff. Incubation is by female; roughly 27-33 days. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching and go to water. Female tends young (and broods them at night while small); but young feed themselves. Age at first flight about 6-7 weeks.,Mainly mollusks; insects. At sea feeds mainly on mollusks; especially mussels and other bivalves; also crustaceans; marine worms; echinoderms. In summer on fresh water eats many aquatic insects; also fish eggs; mollusks; small fish; some plant material. ,Several males may court one female; surrounding her on water. Displays of male include rushing along surface of water with back hunched and head low; bowing jerkily while calling; and quickly snapping tail up to vertical position over back. Nest site is on ground; usually near water; often on a hummock or ridge on tundra; generally hidden by grasses or low scrub. Nest (built by female) is a shallow depression lined with plant material and with down. 
Black-Skimmer,Rynchops niger,Gulls and Terns,Mostly ocean beaches; tidewater. Favors coastal waters protected from open surf; such as lagoons; estuaries; inlets; sheltered bays. Locally on inland lakes in Florida and at Salton Sea; California. Nests on sandy islands; beaches; shell banks. In South America; occurs far inland along major rivers.,Well-known for its skimming habit; furrowing the water with lower mandible; the upper mandible snapping down immediately when contact is made with a fish. Finds food by touch; not by sight; often forages in late evening or at night; when waters may be calmer and more fish may be close to surface. Rarely may forage by wading in very shallow water; scooping up fish.,4-5; sometimes 3; rarely 6-7. Variable in color; whitish to buff to blue-green; marked with dark brown. Incubation is by both sexes (male may do more); 21-23 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Upper and lower mandibles of young are same length at first; so they are able to pick up food dropped on the ground by parents. Young wander in vicinity of nest after a few days; if danger threatens; may attempt to look inconspicuous by lying flat on beach; even kicking up sand to make a hollow to lie in. Able to fly at about 23-25 days.,Mostly fish. Feeds mostly on small fish that live just below surface of water. Also eats some small crustaceans. ,Breeds in colonies. Courtship not well studied; may involve zigzagging flight with two or more males pursuing one female. Nest site on ground on open sandy beach; shell bank; sandbar; sometimes on gravel roof. Nest is shallow scrape in sand. 
Black-Storm-Petrel,Hydrobates melania,Northern Storm-Petrels,Open sea. Favors warm ocean waters; off central California; fewer appear during years of colder water temperatures. Generally far offshore; but in southern California and Mexico; may occur regularly within a few miles of the mainland coast. Nests on rocky islands.,Forages mostly by hovering or fluttering low over water and taking items from surface.,One. White; sometimes with small reddish-brown spots around larger end. Incubation probably by both sexes. Young:  Probably fed by both parents.,Includes crustaceans; small fish. Diet poorly known. May eat many small fish at times; and has been reported feeding on larval form of the spiny lobster. May also eat small squid. Scavenges floating fat from dead animals at sea. ,Breeding behavior poorly known. Nests on islands; often in small colonies. Both members of pair may rest in nesting burrow for nearly 3 months before egg-laying. Active around colonies only at night. Adults give staccato calls while flying around colonies; changing to a musical trill when inside the nest. Nest:  Site is in small opening among boulders; in crevice in cliff; or in burrow (especially abandoned burrow of Cassin's Auklet). Usually no nest built; sometimes a few bits of plant material. 
Black-Swift,Cypseloides niger,Swifts,Open sky over mountains; coastal cliffs. Forages widely over any kind of terrain but is still very local in its occurrence; probably limited to regions with suitable nesting sites. Nests on ledges or in crevices in steep cliffs; either along coast or near streams or waterfalls in mountains.,Forages only while flying. Flight is rapid and often very high; bird scoops insects out of the air with its wide bill. May forage singly or in small flocks.,1. White; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both parents; 24-27 days. Young: Both parents feed and care for young bird; which remains in nest until ready to fly (not climbing about like the young of some other swifts). Age at first flight about 45-49 days.,Flying insects. Feeds on a wide variety of flying insects; including wasps; flies; mayflies; caddisflies; beetles; and others; also spiders. At times may feed heavily on emerging swarms of winged adult ants or termites. ,Courtship apparently involves long aerial chases; and the birds also mate while flying. May nest in small colonies. Nest site is on ledge sheltered by overhang or in protected crevice on cliff; along rocky coast or in mountainous country. Mountain nest sites are often behind waterfalls; in spots where nest is continuously damp from spray. Sites are usually inaccessible. Nest is a small saucer of mud; moss; ferns; sometimes lined with fine plant material. Same site may be reused for years; with material added each time. 
Black-Tern,Chlidonias niger,Gulls and Terns,Fresh marshes; lakes; in migration; coastal waters. For nesting favors fresh waters with extensive marsh vegetation and open water; also sometimes in smaller marshes and wet meadows. In migration found on larger lakes and along coast. Winters in tropical coastal regions; mostly just offshore or around salt lagoons and estuaries.,Forages in flight; dipping to surface of water or shore to pick up items; sometimes pursuing flying insects in the air; seldom plunging into water after prey.,2-4. Pale buff to olive; blotched with brown and black. Incubation is by both sexes; 21-22 days. Young: Develop rapidly; after 2-3 days; may leave nest but remain in vegetation nearby. Capable of flight 19-25 days after hatching; may be fed by parents for up to two more weeks. One brood per year; sometimes two in south.,Mostly insects; fish. Diet on breeding grounds is mostly insects; also small fish; tadpoles; frogs; spiders; earthworms; crustaceans; leeches. In migration and winter at sea; eats mostly small fish; also some crustaceans and insects. ,Breeds in scattered colonies; often associated with Forster's Terns. Early in season; pairs or small groups ascend in spiraling high flight above colony; then glide down. Nest site is low in marsh; on floating mat of plant material; on old muskrat house or debris; or on ground close to water. Nest (built by both parents) may be substantial platform of marsh plants; or simple depression with a few bits of vegetation added; very close to water level; eggs often damp. 
Black-Turnstone,Arenaria melanocephala,Sandpipers,Strictly coastal. Rocky shores; breakwaters; islets; nests on coastal tundra. In migration and winter; typically found in rocky sites along coast; such as rocky shoreline; jetties; breakwaters; also on mudflats and sand beaches at times. Breeds in Alaska on wet tundra near estuaries or lagoons; very close to coast.,On coast; forages mostly by walking slowly on rocks. Feeding on acorn barnacle; may insert bill in shell opening and pry it open; or hammer on shell to break it. Limpets and other mollusks are pried from rocks with pointed bill. On beaches; may turn over rocks; shells; or seaweed to look for food underneath.,4; sometimes 3. Yellowish-green to olive; blotched with dark brown. Incubation is by both sexes; usually 22-24 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young at first; but female usually leaves after about 2 weeks; leaving male to care for them; young find all their own food. Young can make short flights after about 23 days; can fly well at about 28-30 days.,Includes barnacles; mollusks; insects. On breeding grounds; may feed heavily on insects; also some seeds and berries. On coast (where it spends most of year); barnacles and limpets are among main foods. Also eats other crustaceans and mollusks; marine worms. ,Adults often come back to exact same sites and nest with same mate each year. Male displays with circular flight over territory. Nest site is on ground; usually close to water among grasses or sedges; either in open or hidden by tall vegetation. Nest (probably built by both parents) is shallow depression; lined with grasses. 
Black-Vulture,Coragyps atratus,New World Vultures,Open country; avoids higher mountains. Mostly found in flat lowlands; such as coastal plain. Forages over open country; but typically roosts and nests in forest; so is scarce in open plains. In Latin America; often common around cities and towns. Less likely than Turkey Vulture to fly over open water; so absent on many islands (such as Florida Keys).,Often flies very high when foraging; watching for carrion or watching behavior of other vultures to locate food. May forage in family groups.,2; rarely 1 or 3. Pale gray-green; blotched with brown. Usually one egg of clutch more heavily marked than the other. Incubation is by both sexes; typically 37-41 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young remain in nest about 60 days; then may move to higher areas nearby; capable of flight at about 75-80 days. May be partly dependent on parents for several more months.,Mostly carrion. Feeds on carcasses of dead animals of all sizes. At times also eats eggs of other birds; turtles; lizards. May kill and eat young of some birds; sea turtles; sometimes eats newborn young of larger mammals. Also eats some plant material; such as coconuts and rotting vegetables. Will scavenge scraps of refuse from garbage dumps. ,In courtship display; birds may spiral high in air. On ground; male may walk in circles around female; with neck extended; making hissing sounds. Nest site is on ground in thicket; inside hollow log; in large tree cavity up to several feet above ground; or in cave; sometimes in abandoned building. Formerly used hollow tree sites more often (when more were available in southeast). No nest built. 
Black-and-white-Warbler,Mniotilta varia,Wood Warblers,Woods; trunks; limbs of trees. Breeds in mature or second-growth forests; deciduous and mixed. Often in woods on dry; rocky hillsides and ravines. Also nests in dry portions of wooded swamps. In migration; seen most often on trunks and low branches of trees within woodlands and thickets. In winter in the tropics; found in trees from sea level to high in the mountains.,Adapted to creeping along limbs and on tree trunks to feed. Switches body from side to side at each hop while foraging. In early spring; takes dormant insects from tree trunks and branches. Sometimes flies out after flying insects.,5; sometimes 4; rarely 6. Creamy white; flecked with brown at large end. Incubated by female only; 10-12 days. Commonly parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave the nest 8-12 days after hatching; before they are able to fly well.,Insects. Feeds on a wide variety of caterpillars (including those of gypsy moths); beetles (including bark beetles; click beetles; and wood borers); ants; flies; bugs; leafhoppers; aphids; and other insects; also spiders and daddy longlegs. ,Males arrive on breeding grounds in late April; before the females. During courtship; male chases female; with much singing and fluttering. Nest: Placed on ground (or less than 2' up); under dead leaves or limbs; against a shrub; rock; log; or tree. Usually constructed in cavity at top of stump or in a depression in the ground. Open cup (built by female) made of leaves; coarse grass stems; bark strips; pine needles; rootlets; lined with fine grass or hair. 
Black-backed-Woodpecker,Picoides arcticus,Woodpeckers,Boreal forests of firs and spruces. Favors areas of dead or dying conifers; and may concentrate at burned or flooded areas with many standing dead trees. Also in undamaged forests of pine; Douglas-fir; hemlock; tamarack; and spruce; especially spruce bogs. Frequents lowlands in north; mountains in west.,Typical foraging behavior involves methodically flaking the bark off of dead trees; searching for insects. May gradually remove the bark from an entire snag; may forage this way on fallen logs as well. Also gleans insects from bark of live trees; rarely catches insects in flight.,3-4; sometimes 2-6. White. Incubation is by both sexes (male incubating at night and part of day); probably 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Male forages farther from nest; may make fewer feeding trips with more food each time. Young thought to leave nest about 25 days after hatching. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds mainly on the larvae of wood-boring beetles; also eats other insects; spiders; some fruits and nuts. ,Many aggressive displays; with complex harsh calls; some of these displays may also be used in courtship. Nest site is in cavity in dead tree or stub; usually conifer such as spruce or pine; sometimes birch or other deciduous tree; occasionally in live tree or utility pole. Usually 2-15' above ground; rarely 50' or higher. Cavity excavated by both sexes; with male often doing most of work. Bark usually cleared away from area around entrance hole. 
Black-bellied-Plover,Pluvialis squatarola,Plovers,Mudflats; open marshes; beaches; in summer; tundra. For nesting favors drier tundra; often more barren ridges above lowland lakes and rivers. Sometimes in lower wet tundra near coast. In winter mostly on open sand beaches; tidal flats. During migration will often stop in short-grass prairie or plowed fields.,Typically they run a few steps and then pause; then run again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible. Sometimes probes for hidden prey.,4; sometimes 3. Buff to gray-green; with darker blotches. Incubation is by both parents; 26-27 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching; find all their own food. Both parents tend young at first; then female leaves before young are 2 weeks old. If predator threatens; adults may lure it away by putting on broken-wing act. Adults also mob predatory birds that come near nest area. Young are able to fly at 35-45 days; adult male may leave before young fledge.,Insects; mollusks; crustaceans; marine worms. Diet on northern tundra is mostly insects; also some mollusks; and small amount of plant material. In coastal situations (where it spends most of year); eats many polychaete worms; also mollusks; crustaceans; some insects. ,Male displays on territory by flying with slow; deep wingbeats; giving clear whistled notes. Female may be attracted by this display. In courtship; male lands near female; runs stiffly toward her with head low. Nest site is on dry ground; often somewhat raised on ridge or hummock; with good visibility. Nest is a shallow scrape; lined with pebbles and bits of plant material; male begins scrape; female adds lining. 
Black-bellied-Whistling-Duck,Dendrocygna autumnalis,Ducks and Geese,Ponds; fresh marshes. Favors shallow freshwater lakes; may come to those in open country; but seems to favor ponds surrounded by trees. Will nest on ground or in tree cavities. When foraging; often in dry fields; also in irrigated land.,Does much foraging on land; and may feed by day or night. Flocks come to harvested fields to feed on waste grain; also to prairies and overgrown pastures. In shallow water may wade to reach emergent plants; or may dabble at surface or tip up to reach under water.,12-16. Whitish. Females may lay eggs in each others' nests; such "dump nests" may have 50-60 or more eggs. Incubation is by both sexes; 25-30 days. Young: Ducklings in cavity nests can climb walls of cavity; jump to ground 1 or 2 days after hatching. Young tended by both parents; find all their own food. Young fledge at about 2 months.,Mainly seeds and grains. Feeds mostly on seeds of various grasses; also of smartweed and other plants. Insects; snails; and other invertebrates make up less than 10% of diet. ,May mate for life. Often nests in colonies. Nest site usually in tree cavity or broken-off stub; 4-20' above ground or water. Tree nests on land usually close to water; but can be up to 1/4 mile from it. Also frequently nests on ground; in dense low growth near water. Many now use nest boxes; have also nested in chimneys; barns. Cavity nests are bare or with a few wood chips; but ground nests are woven of grasses and weeds. 
Black-billed-Cuckoo,Coccyzus erythropthalmus,Cuckoos; Roadrunners; Anis,Wood edges; groves; thickets. Breeds mostly in deciduous thickets and shrubby places; often on the edges of woodland or around marshes. Also in second growth of mixed deciduous-coniferous woods; or along their brushy edges. In migration; seeks any kind of dense cover; usually among young trees or tall shrubs.,Forages by moving about through shrubs and trees; clambering and hopping among the branches; gleaning insects from foliage.,2-3; sometimes 4-5. May lay more eggs in seasons when caterpillars are abundant. Eggs blue-green; occasionally mottled darker. Incubation is by both parents; 10-14 days. Occasionally lays eggs in nest of Yellow-billed Cuckoo or other bird. Young: Fed by both parents. May leave nest within a week after hatching; climb about in branches; if disturbed; young bird may "freeze" in upright position; with neck stretched and bill pointed straight up. Age of young at first flight about 3 weeks.,Caterpillars and other insects. Feeds heavily on caterpillars when available; including hairy types such as tent caterpillars and others; also other insects such as beetles; grasshoppers; others. Also may eat some snails; small fish; eggs of other birds; and berries and small fruits. ,In courtship; male feeds female. Nest site is in shrub or low tree; 1-20' above the ground; usually lower than 10'; placed among dense branches. May sometimes nest on the ground. Nest (probably built by both sexes) a loose platform of sticks; usually well lined with leaves; grass; pine needles; catkins; other soft material. 
Black-billed-Magpie,Pica hudsonia,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Rangeland; conifers; streamsides; forest edges; farms. Found in many kinds of semi-open country in the west. Avoids unbroken forest; and not found in treeless grasslands or extreme desert situations. Most common in streamside groves of trees in open terrain; farm country; and some suburban areas.,Forages mostly by walking on ground; may use bill to flip over items in search of food. Sometimes steals food from other birds; and supposedly may follow predators at times to pick up scraps that they leave. May take ticks from the backs of elk and other animals.,6-7; sometimes 5-9; rarely more. Greenish gray; heavily spotted with brown. Incubation is by female; 16-21 days; usually about 18. Male feeds female during egg-laying and incubation period. Young: Both parents bring food to nestlings. Young leave nest about 25-29 days after hatching. 1 brood per year.,Omnivorous. Diet is quite varied; but feeds on insects more consistently than most members of the crow family; eats many grasshoppers; caterpillars; flies; beetles; and others. Also eats carrion; rodents; eggs and young of other birds; sometimes small snakes. Vegetable matter such as berries; seeds; and nuts may be eaten more in winter. ,Often nests in small loose colonies. In courtship; males pursue females; often flashing their white wing patches. Nest site is among the branches of tree or large shrub (generally deciduous); 5-60' above the ground; usually 15-30' up. Nest is a huge structure; a big globular canopy of sticks about 3' in diameter; with entrance holes on either side. Inside the canopy is a cup-shaped nest with base of mud or manure and lining of weeds; rootlets; grass; and hair. Both sexes help build nest. 
Black-capped-Chickadee,Poecile atricapillus,Chickadees and Titmice,Mixed and deciduous woods; willow thickets; groves; shade trees. Most common in open woods and forest edge; especially where birches or alders grow; avoids purely coniferous forest. Where it overlaps with other chickadee species in the north and west; Black-capped is mostly restricted to deciduous groves. Will live in suburbs as long as nest sites are available.,Forages mostly by hopping among twigs and branches and gleaning food from surface; often hanging upside down to reach underside of branches. Sometimes takes food while hovering; and may fly out to catch insects in mid-air. Readily comes to bird feeders for seeds or suet. Often stores food; recovering it later.,Usually 6-8; sometimes more or fewer. White; with fine dots of reddish brown often concentrated around larger end. Incubation is by female only; 12-13 days. Female covers eggs with nest material when leaving nest. Male often brings food to female during incubation. Young: Female remains with young most of time at first; while male brings food; later; both parents bring food. Young leave nest at about 16 days. Normally 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects; seeds; and berries. Diet varies with season; vegetable matter (seeds and fruits) may be no more than 10% of diet in summer; up to 50% in winter. Summer diet is mostly caterpillars and other insects; also some spiders; snails; and other invertebrates; also eats berries. In winter; feeds on insects (especially their eggs and pupae); seeds; berries; small fruits. Will eat fat of dead animals. ,Pairs typically form in fall and remain together as part of winter flock. Flocks break up in late winter; and both members of pair help defend nesting territory. Male often feeds female; beginning very early in spring. Nest site is in hole in tree; typically enlargement of small natural cavity in rotten wood; sometimes old woodpecker hole or nesting box; usually 5-20' above the ground. In natural cavity; both sexes help excavate or enlarge the interior. Nest (built by female) has foundation of moss or other matter; lining of softer material such as animal hair. 
Black-capped-Gnatcatcher,Polioptila nigriceps,Gnatcatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Black-capped-Petrel,Pterodroma hasitata,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Forages over warm deep water far off southeastern coast of North America; especially over western edge of Gulf Stream. Also over seamounts or submarine ridges where turbulence may bring food nearer surface. Nests around steep forested cliffs in West Indies; may have nested in burrows on more level ground before exotic predators were introduced there.,Often in loose small flocks; associated with other seabirds. Forages by dipping to surface of water; with feet down and pattering on water; or by settling briefly on water with wings upstretched; sometimes feeds while swimming. May do most feeding early morning and late evening; when some prey items are closer to surface.,One. White. Incubation period unknown; in the closely related Bermuda Petrel; incubation is by both parents; 51-54 days. Young:  No details known. In Bermuda Petrel; both parents feed young; and young bird flies out to sea 90-100 days after hatching.,Includes squid and fish. Diet not well known. Besides small squid and fish; may scavenge floating carrion or refuse; attracted to slicks of natural oils. ,Breeding behavior still poorly known. Nesting season begins late fall; lasts to spring. Nests in colonies; known colonies today are on steep cliffs where forest holds enough soil in place for excavating nest burrows. Active around colonies only at night. Birds do much calling as they fly around cliffs in the darkness; courtship may involve flying in pairs. Nest:  Site is evidently in burrow in soil. Adults undoubtedly dig their own nest burrow. 
Black-capped-Vireo,Vireo atricapilla,Vireos,Oak scrub; brushy hills; rocky canyons. Breeds on hot dry hillsides with dense thickets of brush; especially scrub oaks; often with many openings or gaps rather than solid cover. Winters in Mexico in dense thickets and woodland edges; especially in foothills and lowlands.,Forages more actively than most vireos; moving among branches and twigs in dense cover; sometimes hanging upside down like a chickadee to take items from underside of foliage.,3-4; rarely 2-5. White; unmarked (most other vireos lay spotted eggs). Incubation; by both parents; averages about 15 days; surprisingly long for small size of bird. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching; and may be cared for by parents for more than another month. Sometimes male is left to care for first brood while female begins 2nd nesting attempt.,Mostly insects; some berries. Feeds mainly on insects in summer; diet not known in detail; but eats many caterpillars; beetles; small grasshoppers and crickets; and others; as well as spiders. Also eats some berries and small fruits. Winter diet poorly known; but may include more berries. ,Male defends territory by singing frequently through much of breeding season. In courtship; male sings while following female; may also perform short song-flight. Nest: Placed in low scrubby oak or other dense shrub; usually 2-6' above ground; rarely higher. Both parents help build nest; a small hanging cup suspended in the horizontal fork of a twig. Nest is made of grass; strips of bark; weeds; leaves; bound together with spiderwebs; inside is lined with fine grass. 
Black-chinned-Hummingbird,Archilochus alexandri,Hummingbirds,Semi-arid country; river groves; suburbs. Breeds in many kinds of semi-open habitats in the lowlands; including streamsides; towns; brushy areas; oak groves in canyons. In the southwest; avoids most open desert but may be found along dense washes or desert rivers. After breeding; may move to higher elevations in the mountains.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage; sometimes will take insects from spider webs.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; 13-16 days. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar. Age of young at first flight about 20-21 days. Usually 1-2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,In courtship; male performs "pendulum" display; flying back and forth in wide U-shaped arc; making whirring sounds on each dive. Also buzzes back and forth in short flights in front of perched female. Nest site is in a tree or shrub; typically 4-8 feet above the ground; sometimes lower or higher (up to 30 feet). Placed on horizontal or diagonal branch. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of grasses; plant fibers; spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged with lichens; dead leaves; other debris. 
Black-chinned-Sparrow,Spizella atrogularis,New World Sparrows,Brushy mountain slopes; open chaparral; sagebrush. Found mostly in arid scrub on hillsides; from low foothills up to almost 7;000' in mountains; in chaparral and open thickets of manzanita; scrub oak; sagebrush; chamise; and other low shrubs. In winter also found locally in desert areas; mesquite thickets.,Does most of its foraging on the ground; often moving about slowly and spending much time feeding in a limited area. Also forages up in low shrubs. Except when nesting; often forages in small; loose flocks; sometimes associated with other sparrows.,2-4; sometimes 5. Very pale blue; often unmarked; sometimes dotted with dark brown. Incubation probably about 13 days; and may be mostly by female. Young: Both parents bring food to the young. Age at which the young leave the nest is not well known.,Probably seeds and insects. Diet is not well known; probably eats mostly seeds in winter; many insects in summer; like related sparrows. Probably feeds its young mostly on insects. ,Often nests in small loose colonies. Male sings in spring to defend nesting territory. Nest site is close to ground (from a few inches up to 4' high) in a low shrub; often a sagebrush. Nest is a shallow open cup made of dry grass; weed stems; yucca fibers; lined with fine grass; plant fibers; sometimes feathers or animal hair. 
Black-crested-Titmouse,Baeolophus atricristatus,Chickadees and Titmice,Brushlands; woods; riverside groves. Occurs widely in south Texas brush country; but may be more common in taller trees along rivers. Found in some well-wooded suburbs and parks within its range.,Forages by hopping actively among branches and twigs of trees; often hanging upside down; sometimes hovering momentarily. Often drops to the ground for food as well. Comes to bird feeders for seeds or suet. Opens acorns and seeds by holding them with feet and pounding with bill. Will store food items; retrieving them later.,5-6; sometimes 4-7. White; finely dotted with brown; reddish; or purple. Incubation is probably by female only; 12-14 days. Young: Female stays with young much of time at first; while male brings food; later; young are fed by both parents; sometimes by additional helper. Young leave nest about 15-16 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and seeds. Insects make up the majority of the annual diet; with caterpillars the most important prey in summer; also eats wasps; bees; beetles; true bugs; and many others; including many insect eggs and pupae. Also eats some spiders and snails. Seeds; nuts; berries; and small fruits are important in diet; especially in winter. ,Pairs may remain together all year; joining mixed flocks with other small birds in winter. Flocks break up in late winter; and pairs establish nesting territories. Nest site is in hole in tree; either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; usually 3 to 20 feet above the ground. Will also use nest boxes. Nest (probably built by female) has foundation of grass; moss; leaves; bark strips; lined with soft materials; especially animal hair. 
Black-crowned-Night-Heron,Nycticorax nycticorax,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Marshes; shores; roosts in trees. Found in a wide variety of aquatic habitats; around both fresh and salt water; including marshes; rivers; ponds; mangrove swamps; tidal flats; canals; ricefields. Nests in groves of trees; in thickets; or on ground; usually on islands or above water; perhaps to avoid predators.,Usually forages by standing still or walking slowly at edge of shallow water. May perch above water on pilings; stumps; small boats. Forages mostly from late evening through the night; but also by day during breeding season or in unusual weather.,3-4; sometimes 1-7. Pale green. Incubation is by both sexes; 21-26 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young clamber about in nest tree at 4 weeks; able to fly at about 6 weeks. After 6-7 weeks; may follow parents to foraging areas and beg to be fed there.,Mostly fish. Diet quite variable; mostly fish; but also squid; crustaceans; aquatic insects; frogs; snakes; clams; mussels; rodents; carrion. Sometimes specializes on eggs and young birds; and can cause problems in tern colonies. ,Usually first breeds at age of 2 years. Breeds in colonies; of this species alone or mixed with other herons; egrets; ibises; sometimes with Franklin's Gulls. Some colonies occupied for several decades. May begin nesting earlier in season than other herons. Male chooses nest site and displays there to attract mate. Displays include stretching neck up and forward with feathers ruffed up and slowly bowing while raising feet alternately; giving hissing buzz at lowest point in bow. Nest:  Site varies with colony situation; from on ground to more than 150' high; in trees; shrubs; marsh vegetation; most commonly 10-40' up and on firm support. Nest (built mostly by female with materials supplied by male) a platform of sticks; flimsy or substantial. 
Black-faced-Grassquit,Melanospiza bicolor,New World Sparrows,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Black-footed-Albatross,Phoebastria nigripes,Albatrosses,Open ocean. In foraging at sea; most common over upwellings or over continental shelf; but rarely close to shore. Nests on sandy beaches and other open flat areas on islands in Pacific.,Forages while swimming by seizing items at surface; up-ending to reach underwater; or diving short distances underwater with wings partly spread. Feeds mostly early morning and evening.,One. Creamy white; spotted with brown. Incubation (by both sexes) averages 65-66 days. Young:  For about 18-20 days after hatching; one parent broods and guards the nestling while other forages for food; taking turns every 1 or 2 days. Young is fed by regurgitation; by both parents; until it leaves the nest. Period from hatching to departure from island is about 140-150 days.,Fish; squid; crustaceans. Around Hawaii; feeds heavily on the eggs of flying fish. Also eats many squid; adult fish including flying fish; and crustaceans. Will scavenge carrion or refuse at sea. ,First breeds at age 5 years or older. Courtship "dance" of pairs is complex; includes many ritualized movements including bowing head; mutual preening; swinging head from side to side; pointing bill straight up while calling. Nest:  Preferred nest sites are on higher parts of open sandy beaches. Nest is a simple; shallow depression; with a slightly built-up rim. 
Black-headed-Grosbeak,Pheucticus melanocephalus,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Deciduous and mixed woods. Breeds mainly in oak woodland; streamside groves of cottonwood and willow; pine-oak woods in mountains; pinyon-juniper woodland; seldom in purely coniferous forest. In migration; occurs in any kind of open woods; streamside trees; suburbs; mesquite groves; desert washes. Winters in open woods and brush of the tropics; from lowlands to mountains.,Forages mostly in shrubs and trees; searching for food among foliage. Also may forage on ground and in low growth. Sometimes hovers to take insects from foliage; or catches them in mid-air.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale greenish blue; spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by both parents; 12-14 days; only female incubates at night. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young climb out of nest after about 11-12 days; but are unable to fly for about 2 more weeks; they remain in nearby trees waiting to be fed. Probably 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects; seeds; and berries. In summer feeds on many insects; including beetles; caterpillars; wasps; bees; flies; and many others; also spiders and snails. Feeds on seeds of various weeds; and eats berries of many plants (including mistletoe and poison oak) as well as some cultivated fruit. Young are fed mostly insects at first. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. In courtship; male performs song flights above female; flying with wings and tail fully spread while singing almost continuously. Nest: Placed in tree or large shrub (usually deciduous); 3-25' above the ground; usually about 10-12' up. Nest (built mostly or entirely by female) is an open cup; loosely constructed and bulky; made of twigs; weeds; rootlets; pine needles; lined with fine plant fibers; rootlets; and animal hair. 
Black-headed-Gull,Chroicocephalus ridibundus,Gulls and Terns,Mostly coastal waters. In North America mostly along coast; on protected bays; shallow estuaries; generally rare on fresh waters well inland. In Eurasia found commonly on fresh marshes; lakes; ponds in interior; especially during summer.,Versatile in feeding. Searches for food while walking or swimming; or swoops down to take items from surface while flying; sometimes catches insects in high flight. Black-headed Gulls also steal food from each other and from other birds.,2-3; sometimes 1-4. Variable; gray-green to tan or yellowish; blotched with brown or olive. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-26 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Young may leave nest after about 10 days but remain in general area; capable of flight at about 5 weeks; and independent soon thereafter.,Omnivorous. Eats mostly animal material; including wide variety of insects; also earthworms; marine worms; mollusks; crustaceans; small fish; carrion. During summer may eat many seeds and small fruits. ,Usually nests in colonies; sometimes in isolated pairs. Nest site is usually on ground among vegetation; sometimes on bare soil or above ground. Nest (built by both sexes) usually a scrape lined with bits of plant material; sometimes a mound with depression at top. 
Black-legged-Kittiwake,Rissa tridactyla,Gulls and Terns,Chiefly oceanic. Spends most of year at sea; with wide range of conditions; from edge of pack ice to moderately warm waters off Baja. Favors areas of upwellings; and sometimes concentrates over edge of continental shelf; but may occur from coast to hundreds of miles out. Nests on ledges of steep cliffs on northern islands and mainland.,Does much foraging in flight; dipping down to take items at surface or plunging into water to take prey below surface; also feeds by seizing items at surface while swimming.,1-3. Variable; olive or pale blue to tan; speckled with darker brown and gray. Incubation is by both parents; 25-28 days. Young: Remain in nest until ready to fly; are fed by both parents. Age at first flight 34-58 days; young may return to nest at night for several weeks.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on small fish; often concentrating on one or two locally abundant species (such as sand lance or pollock). If fish numbers are low; eats many crustaceans; often including many euphausiid shrimp. Also eats marine worms; mollusks; small squid; insects; rarely plant material. Unlike most gulls; does not feed at garbage dumps. ,First breeds at age of 3-5 years. Male displays to attract female by going through "choking" motions; jerking head up and down with bill gradually opening. Pairs display by nodding heads; crossing necks; male feeds female. Nest site is on cliff ledge; often quite narrow; sometimes on boulders or on ground. (In Europe also nests on building ledges and roofs.) Nest (built by both sexes; with male bringing most of material) is mound of mud; grasses; seaweed; with shallow depression at center. 
Black-necked-Stilt,Himantopus mexicanus,Stilts and Avocets,Grassy marshes; mudflats; pools; shallow lakes (fresh and alkaline). Found at all seasons at the margins of shallow water in very open country; especially where there is much marsh growth. For nesting; requires bare open ground near water; with little vegetation. Often found in the same places as American Avocet; but the stilt is more partial to fresh water.,Finds most food visually; picking items from surface of water or mud with bill; may spot items underwater; and plunge head into water to take them. A standing bird may grab flying insects as they go past.,4; sometimes 3-5. Buff; heavily blotched with brown and black. Incubation is by both parents; about 25 days; female may incubate by night; both sexes taking turns by day. On very hot days; adult may go to water and wet belly feathers to cool eggs. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching; are tended by both parents; but feed themselves. Age at first flight about 4-5 weeks.,Mostly insects and crustaceans. Feeds on very small creatures that live on or near surface of water; including many flies; beetles; and other insects; shrimp; crayfish; snails; sometimes eats tadpoles or tiny fish. Also eats some seeds of aquatic plants. On some western lakes; may feed heavily on brine shrimps and brine flies. ,Typically nests in loose colonies; sometimes mixed with avocets. If predators approach a colony on foot; several adults may fly to a spot some distance away and perform a distraction display there. Nest site is on bare open ground near water; or on slight rise surrounded by water. Nest (built by both sexes) variable; may be simple scrape in soil or mound built up above water level; lined with pebbles; shells; debris. 
Black-tailed-Gnatcatcher,Polioptila melanura,Gnatcatchers,Desert brush; ravines; dry washes; mesquites. Found in many dry; scrubby habitats. Most common in Sonoran desert with varied growth of mesquites; acacias; and paloverdes; but also found in low acacia scrub and on open flats of creosote bush.,Forages by moving about actively in shrubs and low trees; searching for insects. Often feeds more among leaves during summer and fall; more on bare twigs and branches during winter and early spring. Sometimes hovers to pick items from foliage. Unlike Blue-gray Gnatcatcher; rarely flies out to catch insects in mid-air.,4; sometimes 3-5. Bluish white; very lightly dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young are reported to leave the nest about 10-15 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of small insects; including beetles; true bugs; caterpillars; wasps; ants; flies; moths; small grasshoppers; and many others; also some spiders. Eats small berries at times. ,Pairs may remain together all year; defending permanent territories. Cowbirds often lay eggs in nests of this species; and some gnatcatcher pairs wind up raising only young cowbirds. Nest site is in a low shrub; usually in a vertical fork less than 5' above the ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is a compact open cup of plant fibers; grass; weeds; strips of bark; spiderwebs; plant down; and other items; lined with softer materials such as fine plant down; feathers; and animal hair. 
Black-tailed-Godwit,Limosa limosa,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Black-tailed-Gull,Larus crassirostris,Gulls and Terns,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Black-throated-Blue-Warbler,Setophaga caerulescens,Wood Warblers,Interior of hardwood and mixed deciduous-coniferous forests. Breeds in large areas of relatively undisturbed forests of maple; birch; beech; eastern hemlock; spruce; and fir; mainly in forest containing a dense undergrowth of shrubs (especially rhododendron bogs) and vine tangles. During migration; tends to be in shrubby or forested places. In winter; inhabits dense tropical woods as well as fence rows and gardens.,More methodical in its foraging than many warblers; working over an area thoroughly in the forest understory or lower levels of trees. Forages by gleaning insects among foliage or by hovering briefly to take items from undersurface of leaves. Males tend to forage higher than females in summer. Frequently seen robbing insects from spiderwebs. Will join mixed flocks with other birds on migration and in winter. Establishes winter feeding territories; chasing away others of its own kind.,4; sometimes 2-5. Creamy white; with blotches of reddish brown and gray concentrated at larger end. Incubated by female only; 12-13 days. Cowbirds rarely parasitize nests; possibly because this species tends to nest deep in forest interior. Young: Fed by both parents. Young leave nest after 8-10 days; but fly poorly at this stage. Male often becomes sole provider for fledglings; while female begins 2nd or 3rd nest. Female usually becomes main provider for last brood of season. 2 or occasionally 3 broods per summer.,Mostly insects. In summer; feeds mostly on insects; especially caterpillars; moths; and crane flies; also spiders. In winter; continues to eat many insects; but also takes seeds; berries; small fruits; and flower nectar. Will visit hummingbird feeders for sugar water. ,Some males have more than one mate. Pairs are faithful between seasons; 80% of returning birds nest with previous year's mate. Nest site in thick shrubs (such as laurel; alder; rhododendron; viburnum) or saplings; in a fork within 6' of ground; sometimes with leaning dead branch as extra support. Female builds nest; male helps by supplying materials; nest is open cup of bark strips; cobwebs; plants fibers; lined with pine needles; moss; and hair. 
Black-throated-Gray-Warbler,Setophaga nigrescens,Wood Warblers,Dry oak slopes; pinyons; junipers; open mixed woods. Breeds in dry coniferous and mixed woods; especially of oak; juniper; and pinyon pine. Also frequents manzanita thickets and chaparral. Prefers open areas; as in second-growth; forest edges; or dry hillsides or canyons. In winter in Mexico; found in lowland dry forest; dense thorn scrub; and pine-oak woods.,The most common method of foraging during the breeding season is by searching for insects among leaves of low growing foliage; also hovers briefly to pick insects from various surfaces. Also flies out after flying insects. In migration and winter; often forages in mixed flocks with other species.,Usually 4; sometimes 3-5. Creamy white; with brown marks often concentrated at larger end. Incubated by female for unknown number of days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known. Normally only 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail.  Known to feed especially on oakworms and other green caterpillars. ,Details of nesting behavior not well known. Males arrive on breeding grounds in March or April in southern part of the range; in late May in the north. Nest site varies; may be 4-10' from trunk on horizontal branch in larger tree such as fir or oak; or closer to the main trunk in a smaller tree or shrub. Usually placed 7-35' above the ground; but can be 1-50' up. Nest is a neat; open cup; built probably by both sexes; made of weeds; dry grass; and plant fiber; lined with feathers; fur; hair; and moss. 
Black-throated-Green-Warbler,Setophaga virens,Wood Warblers,Mainly conifers. Breeds mostly in coniferous and mixed forests; very locally in deciduous forest. Often nests around spruce; also in white pine; hemlock; red cedar; and jack pine. An isolated race on the southern Atlantic Coast breeds in cypress swamps. During migration; occurs widely in woodland and edges. Usually winters in foothills and mountains among oaks and pines.,Searches for insects among branches; twigs; and bases of leaves; moving rapidly between foraging sites. Frequently hovers to take insects from underside of leaves. Occasionally catches insects in mid-air. Males tend to forage higher than females while breeding. In late summer; often forages in mixed flocks with chickadees.,4; sometimes 3-5. Gray to creamy white with spots or scrawls of reddish brown. Only female incubates; 12 days. In some areas; up to one-third of nests are parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Nestlings are fed only by female at first; later by male. Young leave nest 11 days after hatching. Parents split up the fledglings; each adult tending half the brood for up to 1 month.,Insects; especially caterpillars. Feeds mainly on non-hairy caterpillars during summer; as well as beetles; true bugs; gnats; aphids; and others; also spiders. Takes poison ivy berries and other berries in migration. In winter; may eat protein corpuscles of tropical cecropia trees. ,Males establish territories by singing; also by chasing and fighting with intruding males. Nest sites are next to trunk where two or more small branches fork out of conifer; usually low (often only a few feet above ground). The race nesting in southern swamps places its nest well out from trunk; and often higher (to 50' or more above ground). Nest (built by both sexes) is open cup of twigs; grass; weeds; bark; spiderwebs; lined with plant fibers; hair; moss; and feathers. 
Black-throated-Sparrow,Amphispiza bilineata,New World Sparrows,Arid brush; creosote-bush deserts. Lives in a variety of dry open habitats; from Sonoran desert with its mix of shrubs and cactus to very barren flats of creosote bush or saltbush. Also locally in grassland with scattered cactus; sagebrush flats; open pinyon-juniper woods.,Forages mostly while running about on the ground; also does some foraging up in shrubs and desert trees. Occasionally makes short flights to catch insects in mid-air.,3-4; sometimes 2. Whitish to very pale blue. Details of incubation not well known. Young: Probably both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest not well known. May raise 2 broods per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. In general; probably eats more seeds in winter; more insects in summer. Also feeds on fresh green shoots; other green vegetation; and ripe berries and fruits when available. Can survive without water at some times of year; drawing its liquid from insects and green plants that it eats. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male sings in breeding season to defend nesting territory. Timing of nesting activity may vary from year to year; depending on timing of rains. Nest site is in a low shrub or branching cactus; typically well hidden and usually within 2' of the ground; sometimes placed on ground at base of shrub. Nest is a rather bulky; sturdy open cup of grass; weeds; plant fibers; and small twigs; lined with fine grass; plant down; and often with animal hair. 
Black-vented-Oriole,Icterus wagleri,Blackbirds and Orioles,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Black-vented-Shearwater,Puffinus opisthomelas,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean near coast. Found closer to shore than most shearwaters; over continental shelf within a few miles of the coast. Favors warm waters at all seasons:  fewer move north along California coast in years when sea surface temperature is lower. Nests on islands with enough soil for burrowing or with natural crevices in rock.,Forages by seizing items at or just below surface while swimming; by plunging into water from low flight; or by making shallow dives from surface. Apparently does not dive as often nor swim as well underwater as the similar Manx Shearwater.,One. Dull white. Incubation probably by both sexes; as in other shearwaters; incubation period not well known. Young:  Both parents probably feed young; by regurgitation. Development of young and age at first flight not well known; but young probably remains in nest at least 2 months.,Probably mostly fish. Diet not well known. Off southern California may eat mostly small fish; including herring and sardines. May also eat small squid; crustaceans. ,Breeding behavior not well known. Nests in colonies on islands. Active around colonies only at night. Both members of pair may rest in nest burrow during daytime before egg-laying. Nest:  Site is in burrow in ground; sometimes in crevice in rock. Burrow may be more than 10' long; often with turns to the side rather than straight; probably both sexes help dig burrow; as in related species. Nest chamber at end of burrow may have a few bits of plant material or may be unlined. 
Black-whiskered-Vireo,Vireo altiloquus,Vireos,Mangroves; low woods. In Florida; breeds mainly in coastal mangrove swamps; but also in subtropical hardwoods on dry land; sometimes several miles inland. Migrants wandering beyond southern Florida may be in any kind of forest; but usually close to the coast. In winter in South America; found in open woods and forest edge.,Forages by searching rather deliberately among foliage for insects; usually in the upper levels of mangroves or other trees.,Usually 3; sometimes 2. White; with spots of brown; purple; or black. Incubation is by female only; length of incubation period not well known. Young: Female feeds the young and probably male does also; but details (including age at which the young leave the nest) are not well known.,Mostly insects and other arthropods; some berries. At times; up to 40% of diet can be spiders. Also feeds on many insects; including caterpillars; earwigs; beetles; wasps; bees; true bugs; flies; mosquitoes; and others. Also eats some berries and possibly seeds during the breeding season. In winter; in the tropics; up to 50% of diet can be berries and small fruit. ,Males arrive in Florida in April; and defend breeding territories by singing continuously throughout the day. Nest: Placed 3-20' above the ground or water; in a mangrove or a deciduous tree. Nest (built by female) is a compact; basket-like cup; suspended by the rim; woven onto a horizontal forked twig. Made of seaweed; grass; weeds; palmetto fibers; spiderwebs; cocoons; lichen; lined with grass; pine needles; and hair. 
Blackburnian-Warbler,Setophaga fusca,Wood Warblers,Woodlands; conifers in summer. Breeds in boreal coniferous and mixed forests; especially spruce and hemlock. In southern part of breeding range in Appalachians; can inhabit completely deciduous forests. When migrating; occurs in all kinds of trees and brush. During winter in the tropics; usually in humid mountain forest.,Feeds mostly in treetops; searching along small branches and twigs. Also hovers to take insects from undersides and tips of foliage. Will search dead leaf clumps; occasionally flies out to catch flying insects. In spruce forests; males tend to forage higher than females. In winter in the Andes; forages in mixed flocks with various tropical birds.,4; sometimes 3-5. White to greenish white; with blotches of reddish brown concentrated near the larger end. Only females incubate; probably 12-13 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. When the young leave the nest; the parents separate; each caring for part of the brood.,Mostly insects; especially caterpillars. In summer; feeds on many caterpillars; particularly those of spruce budworm; also eats beetles; ants; flies; and many other insects; also spiders. Especially during winter; will take some berries as well. ,Details of nesting behavior not well known; partly because nests are high and hard to observe. Male defends nesting territory by singing; sometimes by attacking intruding males. In courtship; male sings; and performs displays with gliding flight and fluttering wings and tail. Nest: Almost always placed in dense vegetation near tips of branches of conifers; and usually high; sometimes up to 80' above ground. Nest (probably built by female) is cup-shaped and made of twigs; bark; and fibers; lined with lichens; moss; grass; hair; and conifer needles. 
Blackpoll-Warbler,Setophaga striata,Wood Warblers,Conifers; broadleaf trees in migration. Breeds in low northern spruce forest; and in alder thickets north of the Arctic Circle and north of treeline. In migration; moves through forests; parks and gardens. In winter in the tropics; found in wooded areas; often in canopy of trees; up to 7;800' elevation.,Forages in a deliberate manner; creeping along on branches in the tops of taller trees; gleaning insects from bark; leaves; and twigs. Also flies out to catch flying insects. In migration; may forage frequently with other warblers.,4-5; sometimes 3. Off-white; with brown and lavender spots. Incubation probably about 12 days; by female. Male feeds female on nest during incubation. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave nest 11-12 days after hatching. 1 brood per year; sometimes 2.,Mostly insects and berries. During the breeding season eats aphids; scale insects; caterpillars; beetles; gnats; mosquitoes; cankerworms; sawflies; wasps; ants; termites; and other insects. Also eats spiders and their eggs; pokeberries; and a few seeds. In migration; noted feeding on spiders; aphids; and scale insects found on citrus and native plants in Florida. ,A few males have more than one mate per nesting season. Females return to nest site of previous year and mate with male holding that territory; whether or not he is already mated. Courtship and nest building are deliberate and protracted; and begin later in the season than in most warblers. Nest: Placed next to trunk; on horizontal branch; usually 2-12' above the ground; rarely more than 30' up. Site is located in the understory of young spruce or fir saplings; sometimes in alder thickets. Bulky open cup (built by female) is made of twigs; bark; sprays of spruce; grass stems; weeds; moss; and lichens; lined with feathers; hair; rootlets. 
Blue-Bunting,Cyanocompsa parellina,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Blue-Grosbeak,Passerina caerulea,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Brush; roadsides; streamside thickets. Breeds in dense low growth in semi-open country; including woodland edges; brushy fields; young second-growth woods; hedgerows. In the Southwest; most common near water; in streamside thickets and mesquite groves. Outside the breeding season; often in open weedy fields. Native forms in Central America inhabit dry tropical forest and edges of other woods.,Forages mostly on the ground; also in low vegetation. Picks up items from ground and from plants; will hover while taking insects from foliage; and will make short flights to catch insects in mid-air. Except when nesting; often forages in flocks.,3-5; usually 4. Pale blue to bluish white; usually unmarked; rarely with brown spots. Incubation is by female only; 11-12 days. Male may feed female during incubation. Cowbirds often lay eggs in nests of this species. Young: Nestlings are fed mostly by the female. Young leave the nest about 9-10 days after hatching. Male may feed young more after they fledge; at least if female is starting second nest.,Mostly insects and seeds. Eats many insects; especially in summer; including grasshoppers; beetles; caterpillars; cicadas; praying mantises; and others; also spiders and snails. Also eats many seeds (may be majority of diet at some seasons); including those of weeds and grass; also waste grain. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. Nesting activity may last late in summer in some areas. Nest: Placed low in shrubs; trees; or vines; usually 3-10' above the ground; rarely up to 25' high. Nest (built by female) is compact open cup of twigs; weeds; rootlets; leaves; strips of bark; often adds odd materials such as snakeskin or pieces of paper; string; or rags. Nest lined with fine grass; rootlets; animal hair. 
Blue-Jay,Cyanocitta cristata,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Oak and pine woods; suburban gardens; groves; towns. Breeds in deciduous or mixed woods; avoiding purely coniferous forest. May be in fairly low or scrubby forest in southern part of range. Favors habitat with many oak or beech trees. Often common in well-wooded suburbs or city parks.,Forages in trees and shrubs and on ground. Comes to feeders for seeds or suet. Pounds on hard nuts or seeds with bill to break them open. Will harvest acorns and store them in holes in ground.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. Greenish or buff; sometimes pale blue; spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by both parents (but female does more); about 16-18 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest 17-21 days after hatching.,Omnivorous. Most of diet is vegetable matter (up to 75% of diet for year; higher percentage in winter); including acorns; beechnuts; and other nuts; many kinds of seeds; grain; berries; small fruits; sometimes cultivated fruits. Eats many insects; especially caterpillars; beetles; grasshoppers; and others; also eats spiders; snails; birds' eggs; sometimes small rodents; frogs; baby birds; carrion; other items. ,Courtship may involve aerial chases; male may feed female. Blue Jays become quiet and inconspicuous around the nest; but will attack with loud calls if the nest is threatened by a predator. Nest site is in tree (either coniferous or deciduous); placed in vertical crotch of trunk or at horizontal fork in limb well out from trunk; usually 8-30' above ground; sometimes 5-50' up. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky open cup made of twigs; grass; weeds; bark strips; moss; sometimes held together with mud. Nest is lined with rootlets and other fine materials; often decorated with paper; rags; string; or other debris. 
Blue-Mockingbird,Melanotis caerulescens,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Blue-crowned-Parakeet,Thectocercus acuticaudatus,African and New World Parrots,They are found in savannas; riparian woodlands and forest margins. Dense; rain forest such as along the Amazon does not seem to be preferred.,NA,Three to four white eggs are laid in a hole in a tree. After 26 days the eggs hatch and the chick will fledge in about 52 days.,NA,Three to four white eggs are laid in a hole in a tree. After 26 days the eggs hatch and the chick will fledge in about 52 days
Blue-footed-Booby,Sula nebouxii,Boobies and Gannets,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Blue-gray-Gnatcatcher,Polioptila caerulea,Gnatcatchers,Open woods; oaks; pines; thickets. Breeding habitat varies with region. In east; mostly in deciduous forest dominated by oak; ash; or maple; or in southern pine woods with understory of oak. In west; often in more scrubby habitat; including pinyon-juniper woods; chaparral; streamside trees; oak forest. Winters in wooded or brushy areas; often near water.,Forages actively in trees and shrubs. Searches for insects among leafy outer twigs of deciduous trees and on branches and trunk in pines. Takes most food while perched; also hovers to pick items from surface; and often flies out to catch insects that it flushes from foliage. Large insects are beaten against a branch before being eaten.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Bluish white; dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by both parents; 11-15 days; usually 13. Young: Female broods young much of time at first; while male brings food; later; both feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 10-15 days after hatching. 1-2 broods per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of small insects; including leafhoppers; treehoppers; plant bugs; leaf beetles; caterpillars; flies; small wasps; and many others. Also eats many spiders. ,Male arrives first in breeding areas and sings to defend territory and attract a mate. Courtship involves male leading female around to potential nest sites. Nest site is in tree; more often deciduous. Nest saddled on top of horizontal limb of tree; less often in fork of horizontal limb; height above ground is quite variable; 2-80' up; but 20-40' may be typical. Nest (built by both sexes) is a compact open cup of grass; weeds; plant fibers; strips of bark; lined with plant down; animal hair; feathers. Outside of nest coated with spiderwebs and decorated with pieces of lichen; making nest well camouflaged. 
Blue-headed-Vireo,Vireo solitarius,Vireos,Mixed conifer-deciduous woods. Breeds in rather open woods; usually containing a mixture of conifers and deciduous trees. Migrants occur in any kind of woodland.,Forages rather deliberately in upper part of trees; searching for insects along branches and twigs as well as among leaves. Sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air; or searches for items on bark of major limbs.,3-5; usually 4. Whitish; lightly spotted with brown and black. Incubation is by both parents; about 12-14 days. In some areas; nests are often parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 2 weeks after hatching.,Mostly insects. In summer feeds almost entirely on insects; including caterpillars; stink bugs; beetles; wasps; bees; ants; moths; tree crickets; and many others; also spiders. Also eats some berries and small fruits; especially in winter; when they may make up more than one-fourth of diet. ,Male sings frequently throughout the day to defend nesting territory. In courtship display; male may fluff up plumage and bob his body up and down while singing. Nest: Placed in horizontal fork of branch in tree; often quite low (3-12' above the ground); can be up to 35' or higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is a rather bulky open cup; suspended by its rim. Nest is made of grass; strips of bark; weeds; plant fibers; rootlets; lined with plant down and hair. Outside of nest may be decorated with moss; pine needles; pieces of paper. 
Blue-throated-Mountain-gem,Lampornis clemenciae,Hummingbirds,Wooded streams in canyons. In its limited range in the U.S.; almost always found near flowing water in shady mountain canyons. Inhabits streamside sycamores; pine-oak woods; coniferous forest.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage; sometimes takes insects from spider webs.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; 17-18 days. Young: Female alone feeds the young. Age of young at first flight is about 24-29 days. May raise up to three broods per year.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers. Often feeds heavily on small insects and spiders; and can survive on them in dry seasons when few flowers are blooming. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Especially during breeding season; males perch at mid-levels in trees and call with repeated monotonous squeak. Nest site varies; may be 1-30 feet above ground; but typically well sheltered from above. May be on branch sheltered by overhanging limb; sometimes on exposed root on undercut stream bank. Also often places nest under eaves of house or under bridge. Nest may be reused; with additions; several times. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of grasses; moss; plant fibers; spider webs. Outer covering of green moss is unique among North American hummingbird nests. 
Blue-winged-Teal,Spatula discors,Ducks and Geese,Fresh ponds; marshes. In summer on shallow freshwater marshes and ponds in open country; also brackish marshes near coast. In migration and winter on any kind of shallow waters; inland or coastal. Flocks in migration are sometimes seen over ocean; many miles offshore.,Forages in very shallow water; gleaning items from surface or swimming forward with head partly submerged; seldom up-ends; and seldom feeds away from water.,9-13; sometimes 6-15. Dull white or tinged olive. Ring-necked Pheasants sometimes lay eggs in Blue-winged Teal nests. Incubation is by female only; 23-24 days. Young: leave nest within 24 hours after hatching. Young find their own food; are tended by female for first few weeks; but broods of young often left alone before old enough to fly. Young capable of flight 38-49 days after hatching.,Mainly seeds. Diet is mostly plant material; especially seeds of various grasses; sedges; pondweeds; smartweeds; and others. Snails; bivalves; insects; crustaceans; and other animal matter may be important in the diet at some seasons. ,Pair formation begins in early winter and continues during spring migration. Male has varied courtship displays; including one in which whole forepart of body is submerged; tail raised; feet waved in air. Nest site is on ground in prairie; hayfield; coastal meadow; sometimes several hundred yards from nearest water. Nest is a shallow depression with some grass or weeds added; lined with down; usually well concealed by surrounding vegetation. 
Blue-winged-Warbler,Vermivora cyanoptera,Wood Warblers,Brushy hillsides; bogs; overgrown pastures; stream and woodland edges. Breeds in dry uplands in low shrubbery; brier patches; weed-grown fencerows; and bushy thickets; often in neglected fields or at the border of woods. Occasionally in deep swamp woods.,Forages by moving about in shrubs and trees; often fairly low. Preferred method of foraging is by probing with bill into curled leaves. Also searches rather deliberately on outer tips of branches; perhaps probing into buds and flowers.,5; sometimes 4-7. White; with fine brown spots on larger end. Female incubates; 10-11 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest 8-11 days after hatching.,Insects and spiders. Details of diet not well known; probably feeds mostly on small insects; including beetles; ants; caterpillars; and grasshoppers; also spiders. ,Hybridizes with Golden-winged Warbler. Hybrids; known as "Brewster's Warblers;" are fertile; and they backcross with the parent species and with each other; second-generation hybrids include a rare type known as "Lawrence's Warbler."  Males sing two types of songs; one in territorial interactions and one in courting a mate. Nest site is well concealed in grass or blackberry vines; sometimes under a bush or sapling; close to or on the ground. Attached to upright stems of grass or weeds; especially goldenrod. The bulky nest is a narrow; deep; inverted cone; usually built by the female alone. Constructed of dead leaves; grass; and beech or grapevine bark; and lined with plant fibers or animal hair. 
Bluethroat,Cyanecula svecica,Old World Flycatchers,Dwarf willows; thick brush. In Alaska; breeds in areas where open tundra is broken by dense low thickets of willow and dwarf birch; especially along drainages or near water. In Eurasia found in various kinds of low brushy habitats; including thickets near water or along forest edge; or scrub in drier hills.,Forages mostly on the ground under dense cover; picking up insects from the soil or from low plants. Sometimes flies up short distances to catch insects in the air.,5-6; sometimes 4-8. Pale blue-green; finely dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young can fly at about 14 days; may leave nest 1-2 days earlier.,Mostly insects. Diet in North America not well known. In Eurasia; feeds on many insects; especially beetles; caterpillars; ants; sawfly larvae; crane flies and other flies; and others. Also eats spiders; plus some snails and earthworms. Eats berries and a few seeds; perhaps mainly in fall. ,Nesting habits in Alaska not well known; probably similar to those in Eurasia; described here. Male sings to defend territory; from hidden perch or from top of shrub; sometimes performs short flight-song display. In courtship; male faces female; points bill up to show off throat pattern; raises tail; hops around female while singing. Nest site is on ground under dense low shrubs or tucked into side of grass tussock. Nest (built mostly or entirely by female) is an open cup of grass; weeds; twigs; moss; rootlets; lined with plant down and animal hair. 
Boat-tailed-Grackle,Quiscalus major,Blackbirds and Orioles,Marshes; beaches; areas near coast; also inland in Florida. Almost always near water and very close to coast; in marshes; flooded fields; mudflats. Sometimes forages in drier fields in coastal regions. Occurs well inland in Florida; but generally near marshes and lakes.,Forages mostly near water; by walking on shore or in shallow water; catching items with rapid thrusts of its bill. Sometimes steals food from larger birds. Will enter heron colonies to feed on unguarded eggs.,Usually 2-4. Pale greenish blue; irregularly marked with brown; gray; and black. Incubation is by female only; about 13-15 days. Young: Fed by female only. Young leave the nest about 12-15 days after hatching.,Omnivorous. Much of diet is taken from water; including many aquatic insects; snails; crayfish; crabs; mussels; shrimp; tadpoles; frogs; and small fish. Also eats land insects (including grasshoppers and caterpillars); eggs and young of other birds. Seeds and grain important in diet at some seasons. ,Nests in colonies. In courtship and territorial display; male perches in the open; fluffs out feathers; spreads tail; and rapidly flutters wings above back while making a variety of harsh and rattling calls. Also postures with bill pointed straight up; especially when threatening another bird. Several males may display together. Both males and females often promiscuous. Nest site is usually near water: in cattails; sawgrass; or bulrushes; in bushes or saplings at edge of marsh; or in taller trees. Generally less than 12' above ground or water; but can be much higher. Nest (built by female) is large; bulky cup of twigs; grass; weeds; bulrushes; Spanish moss; or other available materials; often with mud added to base; lined with fine grass. 
Bobolink,Dolichonyx oryzivorus,Blackbirds and Orioles,Hayfields; meadows. In migration; marshes. Original prime breeding areas were damp meadows and natural prairies with dense growth of grass and weeds and a few low bushes. Such habitats still favored but hard to find; and today most Bobolinks in eastern United States nest in hayfields. Migrants stop over in fields and marshes; often feeding in rice fields.,Forages for insects and seeds both on the ground and while perched up in grass and weed stalks. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,5-6; sometimes 4-7. Grayish to pale reddish brown; heavily blotched with brown and lavender. Incubation is by female only; about 11-13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 8-14 days after hatching; generally before they are able to fly. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Majority of summer diet is insects; including beetles; grasshoppers; caterpillars; wasps; ants; and many others; also spiders and millipedes. Also eats many seeds of weeds; grasses; and grains. May feed more heavily on grain during migration; and in former times caused much damage in southern rice fields. In winter in the tropics; may also eat some berries. ,Males arrive before females on nesting grounds; and display by flying over fields with shallow fluttering wingbeats while singing. In courtship on the ground; male spreads tail; droops wings; points bill down so that yellow nape is prominent. Nest: Placed on the ground (or rarely just above it); well hidden among dense grass and weeds. Typical ground nest is a slight depression holding a shallow open cup of grass and weed stems; lined with finer grasses. 
Bohemian-Waxwing,Bombycilla garrulus,Waxwings,In summer; boreal forests; muskeg; in winter; widespread; including towns. Breeds in far northern forest in open areas; around edges of burns or bogs; or in places with scattered taller trees above brushy understory. Winters in wooded semi-open country where food is available; often concentrates in towns; where plantings of fruiting trees provide abundant berries.,Takes insects by watching from high perch; then flying out to catch them in mid-air. Also forages in trees. Takes berries while perched or hovering. Except when nesting; almost always forages in flocks.,4-6; sometimes fewer. Pale bluish gray; heavily dotted with black; especially toward larger end. Incubation is probably by female only; about 14-15 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 14-18 days after hatching; continue to associate with parents for some time thereafter; perhaps remaining with them through first fall and winter migration.,Mainly insects and berries. Feeds mostly on insects in summer; especially flying insects. Eats more berries and fruits as they become available; and these make up most of winter diet; important are berries of mountain-ash and junipers; also many others. Also eats seeds of birch and other trees; and will drink oozing sap. ,Courtship displays may include both birds perching close together with body feathers puffed out; male passes berry; flower; or other item to female. Nest: Placed on horizontal branch of tree; often spruce; usually 6-20' above the ground; sometimes much higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is an open cup of twigs; grass; and moss; lined with soft materials such as fine grass and feathers. 
Bonapartes-Gull,Chroicocephalus philadelphia,Gulls and Terns,Ocean bays; lakes; muskeg. Breeds in edges of northern forest; where coniferous trees are near lakes or bogs. In migration and winter on many kinds of waters; including rivers and lakes inland; coastal estuaries and lagoons; sometimes well offshore on ocean. Often concentrates at sewage treatment ponds; probably to feed on the abundant insects there.,Forages in flight by plunging into the water or dipping to the surface; also picks up items while swimming or wading. Often catches insects in the air. Unlike larger gulls; seldom scavenges at carrion or garbage dumps.,3; sometimes 2 or 4. Olive to buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is probably by both parents; about 24 days. Young: Both parents feed young in nest. Development of young and age at first flight not well known. If intruders approach the nest; the adults perch on nearby treetops or fly about calling in protest.,Insects; crustaceans; fish. Around inland nesting areas; apparently feeds mostly on insects. In coastal regions; where it spends most of the year; diet includes small fish (such as sand lance; herring; and pollock); crustaceans (especially euphausiid shrimp); insects; marine worms; and other invertebrates. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Nests in isolated pairs or small colonies in sparse northern forest near water. Nest site is in coniferous tree; on horizontal branch usually 4-15' above ground; sometimes up to 20' or higher. Sometimes may build nest on ground. Nest is usually a rather small platform or open cup of sticks; lined with finer materials such as grass and moss. 
Boreal-Chickadee,Poecile hudsonicus,Chickadees and Titmice,Conifer forests. Mainly in forests of conifers; especially spruces; but also in some mixed forest. Occurs in low stunted spruces as far north as treeline. At southern edge of range; found in spruce bogs in east; high mountain forest in west; barely south of Canadian border in either region.,Forages mostly by moving about in dense conifers; gleaning insects from surface of twigs; needles; or trunk. May probe in bark crevices; and may take food while hovering briefly. Also will extract seeds from cones; and will take seeds from deciduous trees such as birches. May store food and retrieve it later.,5-8; sometimes 4-9. White; with fine reddish brown dots often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; 11-16 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Female stays with young and broods them much of time at first; while male brings food. Later; both feed nestlings. Young leave nest at about 18 days. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds on a variety of insects; including many caterpillars in summer; plus moths; beetles; and others; also spiders. Eats many insect eggs and pupae; especially in winter. Also eats seeds of various trees. ,May mate for life; the birds remaining together all year. Nest site is in hole in tree; either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; chickadees may also excavate their own site or enlarge an existing hole. Site is usually low; 1-12' above the ground. Both sexes help with excavation; but only female builds nest inside. Nest has foundation of moss; bark strips; lichens; feathers; lining of animal hair and plant down. 
Boreal-Owl,Aegolius funereus,Superb Owls,Mixed-wood and conifer forests; muskeg. Nests mostly in forests where coniferous trees such as spruce or fir are mixed with deciduous trees including aspen or birch. Such habitats are found at low elevations in the north; only in high mountains toward the south. During winter invasions; usually found in groves of conifers.,Hunts mostly at night (although nighttime is not entirely dark in summer in far north). Hunts by moving through forest from one perch to another; watching for prey; then swooping down to take prey in its talons. Can capture prey hidden under snow or under dense vegetation; because ears are adapted for precise location of sounds.,3-4; sometimes 2-5 (European birds may lay more eggs). White. Incubation is by female only; 26-32 days. Young: Female remains with young most of time at first; male brings food; female feeds it to young. After about 3 weeks; female also hunts and brings back food. Young leave nest about 28-36 days after hatching; are fed by parents for at least 2 more weeks.,Mostly small mammals. Feeds mostly on voles and mice; also small squirrels; shrews; pocket gophers. Also eats small birds of various kinds; and insects; especially crickets. ,Beginning in late winter or early spring; male sings at night to defend territory and attract female. In courtship; male feeds female. Male sings at potential nest holes; and female apparently makes final choice of site. Nest site is in cavity in tree; usually old woodpecker hole (Northern Flicker or Pileated Woodpecker) or natural hollow; 20-80' above ground. Also will use artificial nest boxes (some populations in northern Europe nest mostly in boxes). Usually chooses new nest site each year. 
Botteris-Sparrow,Peucaea botterii,New World Sparrows,Desert grassland; coastal prairie. In our area; found mostly in drier grassland areas with relatively tall grass and scattered taller shrubs; mainly desert grassland in Arizona; coastal prairie in Texas. Avoids true desert and heavily grazed areas. Farther south in Mexico and Central America; also found on dry scrub areas; overgrazed pastures; and open savanna.,Forages almost entirely while hopping or running on the ground; picking up items from the ground or from plants. Usually forages alone; sometimes in pairs or family groups.,2-5; probably usually 4. White to pale bluish white; unmarked. Details of incubation are not well known. Young: Probably both parents help feed the nestlings.,Mostly insects and seeds. Diet is not known in detail. In summer feeds mainly on insects; especially grasshoppers; crickets; caterpillars; and beetles; plus many others. Also eats many seeds; probably more so in winter. ,Nesting activity is mostly in early summer in Texas; mostly in late summer (after onset of summer rainy season) in Arizona. Male sings from a raised perch to defend nesting territory. Details of nesting behavior are not well known. Nest: Nest is usually on the ground; often in a slight depression in soil and hidden under grass and weeds; sometimes slightly elevated in base of grass clump; and occasionally a few inches up in the base of a bush. Nest is a shallow open cup made of grass. 
Brambling,Fringilla montifringilla,Finches,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Brandts-Cormorant,Phalacrocorax penicillatus,Cormorants,Ocean; coast. Almost always on salt water; entering brackish water at mouths of estuaries. May forage fairly close to shore or well out at sea. Nests on islands and locally on mainland; mostly on slopes rather than ledges of vertical cliffs.,See family introduction. Reportedly able to dive deep; perhaps more than 150' below surface. Forages singly or in groups; sometimes in association with sea lions. May forage at all levels from near surface to near bottom; perhaps mostly the latter.,4; sometimes 3-6. Whitish to pale blue; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; incubation period unknown. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Age at first flight unknown.,mostly fish. Eats a wide variety of fish; including herring; rockfish; also some shrimp; crabs. ,Breeds in colonies. Male chooses nest site and displays there to ward off rivals and attract mate. Displays include drawing head back with blue throat pouch extended and bill pointed upward; spreading tail; and fluttering wings; also thrusting head forward and downward in rapid repeated strokes. Nest:  Site is on ground; either level or steeply sloped. Nest is mound of seaweed; eelgrass; algae; cemented by droppings. Most nest material is obtained underwater; male does most of gathering; female does most of building. Pair may use same nest every year; adding to it annually. 
Brant,Branta bernicla,Ducks and Geese,Salt bays; estuaries; tundra (summer). Usually on wet coastal tundra of high Arctic in summer; along coastlines in fairly mild climates in winter. Migrants may make regular stopovers on a few freshwater lakes in the interior of the continent.,forages by wading or tipping up in shallow water; or by walking on tidal flats or on shore. Feeds in flocks at most times of year.,3-5; rarely up to 8. Creamy white to pale olive; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by female only; 22-26 days; usually 24. When female leaves nest to feed; she covers eggs with down; keeping them warm. Young: leave nest within 1-2 days after hatching; are tended by both parents and led to feeding areas; where young find their own food. In long daylight of high Arctic; young feed at all hours and develop rapidly; fledging at 40-50 days.,mostly plant material. In migration and winter; eats aquatic plants; eelgrass heavily favored where available; also takes wigeon grass; rockgrass; green algae; others. On breeding grounds; grazes on sedges; grasses; pondweed; others. Also eat a few aquatic insects; mollusks; worms. ,Pair bond usually formed on wintering grounds. Often breeds in loose colonies. Nest site is on small island in tundra pond; slight rise in low grassy flats; usually within 1-5 miles of coast and often subject to destruction by storm tides. Nest is a shallow bowl of grass and other materials; heavily lined with down. 
Brewers-Blackbird,Euphagus cyanocephalus,Blackbirds and Orioles,Fields; prairies; farms; parks. Occurs in many kinds of open and semi-open country; including shrubby areas near water; streamside woods; aspen groves in mountain meadows; shores; farmland; irrigated or plowed fields. Often around human habitations; foraging on suburban lawns and in city parking lots.,Walks on the ground as it searches for food. Sometimes wades in very shallow water. Sometimes catches insects in flight. May follow farm machinery in fields to feed on insects turned up by the plow. Except in nesting season; usually forages in flocks.,4-6; sometimes 3-7. Pale gray to greenish gray; spotted with brown. Incubation is by female; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 13-14 days after hatching. 1 brood per year; sometimes 2.,Mostly insects and seeds; some berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including grasshoppers; crickets; beetles; aphids; caterpillars; termites; also some spiders; snails; tiny crustaceans. Eats many seeds of grasses and weeds; plus much waste grain. Also eats berries; especially in summer. ,Often nests in loose colonies of up to 20-30 pairs. In courtship display (or sometimes in aggressive display); male points bill straight up or forward; fluffs out body feathers; and partly spreads wings and tail. Nest site is quite variable; usually in tree 20-40' above ground; but may be on ground among tall grass; in bushes; or in crevice in cliff. Nest (built by female) is a rather bulky open cup made of twigs; grass; weeds; and pine needles; lined with fine grass; rootlets; animal hair. Often has mud or dried manure added to base. 
Brewers-Sparrow,Spizella breweri,New World Sparrows,Sagebrush; brushy plains; also near treeline in Rockies; in winter; also weedy fields. In summer typically in open flats covered with sagebrush; sometimes in stands of saltbush; on open prairie; or in pinyon-juniper woodland. Northern race (sometimes considered a separate species; called "Timberline Sparrow") summers at and above treeline in Canadian Rockies; in stunted thickets of willow; birch; and fir. In winter; found in open country; especially desert dominated by creosotebush.,Forages on the ground and in low shrubs. Except during nesting season; usually forages in flocks; often associated with other kinds of sparrows.,3-4; sometimes 5. Pale blue-green; with variable brown spotting often concentrated toward larger end. Incubation lasts 11-13 days; roles of sexes in incubation not well known. The incubating bird may sit motionless on nest until very closely approached. If disturbed; adult may fly away or may drop to the ground and sneak away through the grass. Young: Both parents probably feed the nestlings. Young birds leave nest about 8-9 days after hatching; before fully capable of flight. Adults may raise more than 1 brood per season.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet in summer is mostly insects; including beetles and beetle larvae; plant lice; caterpillars. By late summer more seeds are eaten; and in winter diet is mostly seeds. Can survive for an extended period on dry seeds; with no water. ,Male sings in spring to defend nesting territory. Nest site is almost always well concealed in low shrub; no more than 4' above ground; rarely on ground. Nest is a small; compact; open cup of grasses; weeds; twigs; rootlets; lined with finer plant material and with animal hair. 
Bridled-Tern,Onychoprion anaethetus,Gulls and Terns,Warm oceans. Spends most of year at sea; over warm waters; generally in offshore waters rather than far out in mid-ocean. In Florida waters often forages along weed lines on landward side of Gulf Stream; so may be found closer to shore than Sooty Tern. Nests on islands with areas of rock rubble; limestone caves; bushes; or other shelter.,Forages mostly by flying low; hovering; and dipping down to take items from surface of water; seldom plunge-dives into water. May concentrate where schools of predatory fish are chasing smaller fish to surface. May sometimes feed at night.,One. Pale buff; spotted with dark brown or reddish-brown. Incubation is by both parents; 28-30 days. Young: May leave nest after a few days and hide in nearby cover. Both parents feed young; regurgitating small fish. Age at first flight about 55-63 days; may become independent about a month later.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on small fish; also small squid; crustaceans; insects. ,Breeds in isolated pairs or in colonies; often with other terns. Florida nesters were associated with Roseate Terns. Courtship involves high flight by groups or pairs. Male may fly slowly and low over colony; carrying stick or fish; to be pursued by other birds. On ground; two birds bow; strut; turn in circles. Nest site is usually in sheltered spot; such as under ledge; among rock rubble; in small limestone cave; under shrub; sometimes on open ground. Nest is slight scrape in soil; with little or no lining added. 
Bridled-Titmouse,Baeolophus wollweberi,Chickadees and Titmice,Oak and sycamore canyons; pine-oak woods. Breeds mostly in areas with many live oaks; often in pine-oak woodland. In some areas; will breed in streamside groves of cottonwoods and willows at middle elevations. In winter; small numbers are regularly found in such cottonwood-willow groves.,Forages in various trees and bushes but especially in oaks; hopping actively among branches and twigs; pecking at bases of leaves; often hanging upside down. Will feed on the ground briefly as well. Will come to bird feeders for seeds or peanut-butter mixtures; opens seeds by holding them with feet and pounding with bill.,5-7. Unmarked white. Details of incubation are not well known; but probably mostly or entirely by female. Young: Probably both parents bring food for young. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Mostly insects; some seeds. Diet is poorly known. Apparently feeds mostly on insects; including caterpillars; beetles; probably many others; including insect eggs and pupae. Also eats various seeds. ,Nesting behavior is poorly known. Pairs may remain together at all seasons; establishing nesting territory after flocks break up in late winter. In Arizona and adjacent New Mexico; nesting activity is mostly from April to June. Nest site is in hole in tree; often in dead limb or stump; may be either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole. Nest height varies; 4-30' above ground. Will also use artificial nest boxes. Nest has extensive soft lining of grass; leaves; spiderwebs; lichens; plant down; catkins; animal hair; and other items. 
Bristle-thighed-Curlew,Numenius tahitiensis,Sandpipers,Tundra (Alaska); reefs and beaches in winter. Nests at a few sites in western Alaska; well inland in steep hilly country; on open tundra with scattered small shrubs. Winters on islands in tropical Pacific; on beaches; coral reefs; mudflats; grassy fields.,Forages mostly by walking on ground; picking up items from surface; probably also probing in soil or mud with long bill. In feeding on thick-shelled eggs of albatrosses on winter range; may pick up a piece of rock and use it to crack the shell; a rare case of tool-using by a bird.,Usually 4. Olive-buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; roughly 25 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching; are tended by both parents. Young feed themselves. Adults are very aggressive in defending the nest and young; may put on "distraction display" to lure predators away; or may directly attack even large predators. After a few days; families with young move away from nest site; eventually gathering with other families on hilltops. Adult females usually depart before young fledge; leaving males to care for young.,Includes crustaceans; insects; berries. Summer diet not well known; probably includes many insects. In late summer; may feed heavily on berries. On Pacific islands where it winters; feeds on crustaceans; snails; small fish; also eggs of seabirds nesting there. ,Early in breeding season; male displays by flying over nesting territory; calling. Nest site is on the ground on hilly upland tundra with scattered small shrubs; with nest often placed directly under a dwarf willow. Nest is a shallow depression in tundra; lined with bits of lichen; moss; and leaves. 
Broad-billed-Hummingbird,Cynanthus latirostris,Hummingbirds,Streamsides; foothill oak woodlands. Breeds mostly in semi-open habitats at around 3;000-5;000 feet in Arizona. Favors areas with streamside groves of sycamore or cottonwoodand with dense mesquite thickets; or open oak woodlands in lower canyons. In winter may be found along streams in desert country.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage; sometimes will take insects from spider webs.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; probably more than 2 weeks. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and eats many tiny insects as well. Favors red or orange tubular flowers such as bouvardia or desert honeysuckle. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Male has soft jumbled song; not often heard; seems to defend territory mostly by perching high; watching for intruders and chasing them away. Nest site is in deciduous shrub or low tree; saddled on horizontal or drooping branch or placed in fork; usually 3-9 feet above the ground. Nest (built by female) is a relatively loose cup of grasses; plant fibers; spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged with bits of leaves or bark; unlike many hummingbird nests; outside usually not decorated with lichens. 
Broad-tailed-Hummingbird,Selasphorus platycercus,Hummingbirds,Mountain meadows and forests. Breeds mostly in mountains; up to over 10;000 feet elevation. Mostly in rather open forest; especially near streams; including pine-oak and pinyon-juniper woods; and associations of spruce; Douglas-fir; and aspen. Migrants occur in all semi-open habitats of mountains and also make stopovers in lowlands.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. When feeding on small insects; may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage. Also sometimes takes spiders or trapped insects from spider webs.,2; rarely 1-3. White. Incubation is by female only; 16-19 days. Young: Female feeds the young. Nest stretches as the young birds grow. Age of young at first flight about 21-26 days.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; favoring red tubular flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Also attracted to sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Male defends territory by perching high; scanning for and then chasing intruders. In courtship display; male repeatedly climbs high in the air (up to 60 feet) and then dives; with a loud wing-trill. Nest site is in a tree; on a near-horizontal twig or branch; typically sheltered from above by an overhanging branch. Usually 4-20 feet above the ground; sometimes higher. Nest (built by female) is a neatly constructed cup of spider and plant down; with the outer edge covered with lichen; moss; bits of bark. 
Broad-winged-Hawk,Buteo platypterus,Hawks and Eagles,Woods; groves. Typically breeds in deciduous forest or mixed coniferous-deciduous forest; often near water and near clearings or edges. Migrants may be seen over any kind of open country; but tend to stop for the night in forest or extensive groves of trees.,Hunts by watching for prey from a perch; usually located along edge of woods or near water. When prey is spotted; the hawk swoops down rapidly to capture the creature in its talons. Occasionally hunts by flying through the woods or along watercourses; actively searching for prey.,Usually 2-3; sometimes 1-4. Whitish; usually spotted with brown. Incubation is almost entirely by female; 28-31 days. Male brings food to female during incubation; then he may sit on eggs while she eats. Young: Female remains with young almost constantly for first 1-2 weeks after they hatch; male brings food; and female feeds it to nestlings. Young may climb out of nest onto nearby branches at about 4-5 weeks; can fly at about 5-6 weeks; and soon start learning to hunt.,Includes small mammals; amphibians; reptiles; birds. Varied diet includes mice; voles; squirrels; other small mammals; toads; frogs; snakes; lizards; young turtles; various small birds; large insects. Sometimes eats crayfish; fish; centipedes; earthworms. ,Early in breeding season; pairs circle high in the air; calling. In display; one bird may fly high; then dive steeply toward the ground. Nest site is usually in the lower part of a large tree (either deciduous or coniferous); typically 25-40' above ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is a rather small platform of sticks; lined with softer materials such as bark and moss. Leafy green twigs often added during nesting cycle. Often uses pre-existing nest of hawk; crow; or squirrel; adding material to it. 
Bronzed-Cowbird,Molothrus aeneus,Blackbirds and Orioles,Farmland; brush; semi-open country; feedlots. Outside the breeding season; generally in very open habitats in the lowlands; foraging in open fields and around cattle feedlots and roosting in brushy woods. In breeding season; wanders widely through many kinds of habitats including forest edge; desert; open woods in mountains.,Forages mostly by walking on the ground in the open. May associate with cattle or horses in pastures; catching insects flushed from the grass by the grazing animals. Reportedly may sometimes take ticks or insects from backs of cattle.,Pale blue-green; unmarked. Number of eggs laid per female is unknown; but may be nearly one egg per day for up to several weeks. When laying eggs; female cowbird may pierce eggs already in nest. Frequent "hosts" for Bronzed Cowbirds include orioles; thrashers; towhees; many others; including smaller birds like warblers and gnatcatchers. Young: Nestling is fed by the "host" parents and develops rapidly; leaves nest 10-12 days after hatching.,Seeds and insects. Much of annual diet is seeds; including those of grasses and weeds; and waste grain. Occasionally eats berries. Also eats insects; including caterpillars; beetles; flies; and others; plus snails and spiders. While females are laying eggs; snails may be important as a source of calcium. ,A brood parasite; never raising its own young. In courtship display on ground; male puffs out his feathers so that he appears almost round; spreads and lowers his tail; and points his bill down as he sings; in more intense version; he vibrates his wings and rises slowly a few feet in air; then slowly descends again. Both sexes are promiscuous; not forming pairs. Nest: Builds no nest; eggs are laid in nests of other birds. 
Brown-Booby,Sula leucogaster,Boobies and Gannets,Tropical oceans. Widespread at sea; including very far from land; over warm waters in tropics and subtropics. Also often found close to shore; especially around islands; sometimes foraging in very shallow or muddy waters. Nests on rocky or sandy islands.,Forages mostly by plunging headfirst into water from flight; usually diving at angle and from fairly low above surface. Sometimes hovers before diving; dives from perch; swoops low to take items from surface; or seizes items while swimming. May pursue flying fish in the air. Also steals food from other birds.,1-2; rarely 3. Whitish to pale blue-green; becoming nest-stained brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 40-47 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. When 2 eggs laid; 2nd young to hatch rarely survives. Period from hatching to first flight varies; depending on food supply; 84-119 days. Juvenile returns to nest site and begs to be fed for many weeks after first flight; often 20 weeks or more.,Mostly fish. In North American waters; diet includes flying fish and mullet; also squid and shrimp. ,Probably first breeds at age of 4 years; and may mate for life. Courtship displays by members of pair include bill-touching; bowing; throwing head back with bill pointing skyward. Nests in large or small colonies; sometimes isolated pairs; on tropical or subtropical islands. Nest:  Site is on ground or cliff. Nest is shallow depression; sometimes sparsely lined; sometimes with large mound of twigs; grass; and debris; built by both sexes. 
Brown-Creeper,Certhia americana,Creepers,Woodlands; groves; shade trees. Breeds in mature forest; either coniferous or deciduous; with many large trees; ranging from mountain pine woods to lowland swamp forest. In migration; may be found in any habitat with at least a few good-sized trees; even suburbs or city parks.,Does almost all foraging on trunk and limbs of trees; climbing slowly with tail braced against surface; examining bark visually and probing in crevices. Occasionally forages on ground or snow.,5-6; sometimes 4-8. Whitish; dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by female; about 14-17 days. Male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest about 13-16 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; especially insect eggs and pupae hidden in bark; also weevils and other beetles; true bugs; leafhoppers; scale insects; aphids; caterpillars; ants; and many others. Also feeds on spiders and pseudoscorpions. Eats some seeds; and will feed on suet or peanut-butter mixtures. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing. In courtship; male may perform rapid twisting flight among trees; may pursue female in the air and around tree trunks. Nest: Usual nest site is behind a large strip of bark still attached to a tree; occasionally in cavity in tree. May be at any height from very low to 50' or more above ground. In typical sites; nest is a shallow half-cup; closely fitting the available space behind the bark slab. Nest (built by female; with male bringing some material) is made of twigs; bark strips; moss; leaves; lined with finer materials. 
Brown-Jay,Psilorhinus morio,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Dense riverside woods. In Texas; found locally in relatively tall; dense; native woods along Rio Grande. In Mexico and Central America; lives in a variety of woodland habitats; especially around clearings; open woods; forest edges.,Usually forages in flocks. Forages on the ground in dense cover; or in shrubs or trees; hopping about actively through the branches. Visits large flowers to feed on nectar and possibly insects there. Will break open hard nuts or seeds by pounding on them with bill.,3-4; sometimes 2-8. Blue-gray; spotted with brown. Incubation is by female (or by multiple females); about 18-20 days; other adults in flock may feed incubating female. Young: Fed by all adults in flock. Young leave nest about 3-4 weeks after hatching.,Omnivorous. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; also spiders; small lizards; rodents; eggs and nestlings of smaller birds. Also feeds on berries; fruits; seeds; nectar. ,Nesting habits in Texas not well known. Farther south; has complicated social system. Each flock has only one nest; eggs in  nest may be laid by only one female or by more than one; all adults in flock help to feed young in nest. Nest site is in tree or shrub; usually fairly low in Texas; probably in the range of 15-30' above the ground. Nest may be built by pair or by several adults. Often placed out at fork in horizontal limb. Nest is a bulky cup of sticks and twigs; lined with bark fibers; weeds; other soft material. 
Brown-Noddy,Anous stolidus,Gulls and Terns,Tropical oceans. Found over warm seas; often very far from land. Seldom comes near mainland coast anywhere; except when driven there by storms. Nests on tropical islands; in bushes on beach or on rocky ledges.,Forages in flight by dipping to take items from surface of water. Sometimes makes shallow plunges for prey just below surface; but not forceful plunge-dives like some terns. Rarely settles on water to feed. At Tortugas; adults nesting close together in colony may fly out to sea to forage together.,One. Pale buff; lightly spotted with reddish brown and pale lavender. Incubation is by both sexes; 35-38 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. At Tortugas; adult noddies often forage closer to colony than Sooty Terns; feeding their young more often; and the young mature faster (able to fly at 6-7 weeks).,Small fish. As far as known; feeds on small fish; often catching them when schools of large predatory fish drive the smaller ones to the surface. ,Courtship involves bowing and nodding movements (leading to name of "Noddy"); also swift high flight by pairs. Nest: On Tortugas; nest site is in bay cedar or cactus; a few inches to 12' above ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is a platform of sticks and seaweed; often with bits of rock or coral added as lining. Nests may be re-used and added to every year; growing to large size. In some other regions; species nests on cliffs and among stone crevices; laying eggs on bare rock. 
Brown-Pelican,Pelecanus occidentalis,Pelicans,Salt bays; beaches; ocean. Mostly over shallow waters along immediate coast; especially on sheltered bays; sometimes seen well out to sea. Nests on islands; which may be either bare and rocky or covered with mangroves or other trees. Strays may appear on fresh water lakes inland.,Forages by diving from the air; from as high as 60' above water; plunging into water headfirst and coming to surface with fish in bill. Tilts bill down to drain water out of pouch; then tosses head back to swallow. Will scavenge at times and will become tame; approaching fishermen for handouts.,3; sometimes 2-4. White; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; roughly 28-30 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. Young may leave ground nests after about 5 weeks and gather in groups; where returning parents apparently can recognize own offspring. Young may remain in tree nests longer (perhaps up to 9 weeks) before clambering about in branches. Age at first flight varies; reportedly 9-12 weeks or more. Adults continue to feed young for some time after they leave colony. 1 brood per year.,Almost entirely fish. Types of fish known to be important in some areas include menhaden; smelt; anchovies. Also some crustaceans. ,Nests in colonies. Nest:  Site is on ground or cliff of island; or on low trees such as mangroves. Nest (built by female; with material gathered by male) may be simple scrape in soil; heap of debris with depression at top; or large stick nest in tree. 
Brown-Shrike,Lanius cristatus,Shrikes,NA,NA,NA,Mostly insects; small rodents; and small birds.,NA
Brown-Thrasher,Toxostoma rufum,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Thickets; brush; shrubbery; thorn scrub. Breeds in areas of dense low growth; especially thickets around edges of deciduous or mixed woods; shrubby edges of swamps; or undergrowth in open pine woods; also in suburban neighborhoods with many shrubs and hedges. Winters in similar areas or in any habitat with dense brush.,Does much foraging on the ground; using its bill to flip dead leaves aside or dig in the soil as it rummages for insects. Perches in shrubs and trees to eat berries. Will crack open acorns by pounding them with its bill.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 2-6. Pale blue to bluish white; finely dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 11-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 9-13 days after hatching. 2 broods per year; perhaps sometimes 3.,Varied; includes insects; berries; nuts. More than half of diet is insects; including beetles; caterpillars; true bugs; grasshoppers; cicadas; and many others; also eats spiders; sowbugs; earthworms; snails; crayfish; and sometimes lizards and frogs. Berries and small fruits also very important in diet; especially in fall and winter; and eats many nuts and seeds; particularly acorns. ,Male defends territory by singing loudly from prominent perches. In courtship; male approaches female; singing softly; either bird may pick up leaves or sticks; and present them to the other bird. Nest: Usually placed 2-7' above the ground in a dense shrub; vine tangle; or low tree. Sometimes on the ground under dense cover; or as high as 12' up. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky structure; with foundation of sticks supporting a loose cup of twigs; leaves; weeds; grass; bark fibers; lined with finer materials such as grass or rootlets. 
Brown-capped-Rosy-Finch,Leucosticte australis,Finches,Very much like that of Black Rosy-Finch.,NA,3-5. White; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 18 days after hatching; and may remain with parents through end of summer and into the fall. 1 brood per year.,FEEDING. Diet and feeding behavior are very similar to those of Gray-crowned Rosy-Finch,At high elevations where this bird nests; snow may cover nesting sites until late June in some years. Birds may be already paired when they arrive at breeding areas. Nest site is in a crevice or hole in a cliff; sometimes a very narrow crevice where the nest is quite inaccessible; sometimes under a rock; in mine shaft; or in abandoned building. Nest (built by female) is a bulky cup of moss; grass; weeds; rootlets; lined with fine grass and sometimes with feathers or animal fur. 
Brown-crested-Flycatcher,Myiarchus tyrannulus,Tyrant Flycatchers,Sycamore canyons; saguaros; river groves. In Texas; mostly in dry woodlands and groves of taller trees along streams and rivers. Farther west; found in tall sycamores or cottonwoods along streams; in lowlands or in canyons; also common in open desert where giant saguaro cactus grows. Limited to areas with large cavities (in trees or saguaros) for nesting.,Forages mostly by flying out from a perch and hovering while taking insects from foliage. Usually forages fairly high. Also catches some insects in mid-air; or from branches or trunks of trees; and occasionally descends to take them on or near the ground. Will perch in shrubs or cactus to eat fruit.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White to pale buff; blotched with brown and lavender. Incubation is by female only; about 13-15 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight probably about 12-18 days. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds mainly on insects; especially cicadas; grasshoppers; and beetles; also other large insects such as dragonflies; praying mantises; and others. Will take small lizards; and has been seen catching and eating hummingbirds. Also feeds on fruit and berries; including the fruit of saguaro cactus. ,Male defends nesting territory with loud calls; sometimes by fighting with other males. Courtship may involve male chasing female among the trees. Nest site is usually in hole in tree; either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; usually 20-50' above the ground. Sometimes nests in artificial sites such as birdhouses; drainpipes; or hollow fence posts. Both sexes help build nest; in deep cavities; they may carry in large amounts of material; to bring the nest level up close to the entrance. Nest foundation is made of grass; weeds; strips of bark; rootlets; feathers; or other debris; lined with finer materials. Usually includes a piece of snakeskin in lining (or sometimes a piece of clear plastic instead). 
Brown-headed-Cowbird,Molothrus ater,Blackbirds and Orioles,Farms; fields; prairies; wood edges; river groves. Favors open or semi-open country at all seasons. In winter often concentrates in farmland; pastures; or cattle feedlots; where foraging is easy. More widespread in breeding season; in grassland; brushy country; forest edges; even desert; but tends to avoid dense unbroken forest.,Forages mostly by walking on the ground. Often associates with cattle or horses in pastures; catching the insects flushed from the grass by the grazing animals. Originally; was closely associated with bison herds on the Great Plains.,Whitish with brown and gray spots concentrated at larger end. Female may lay nearly one egg per day for several weeks; up to 40 in a season; exceptionally 70 or more. Female often removes an egg from "host" nest before laying one of her own. Known to have laid eggs in nests of over 220 species of birds; and over 140 of those are known to have raised young cowbirds. Young: Fed by "host" parents. Develop rapidly; and leave nest usually after 10-11 days.,Mostly seeds and insects. Seeds (including those of grasses; weeds; and waste grain) make up about half of diet in summer and more than 90% in winter. Rest of diet is mostly insects; especially grasshoppers; beetles; and caterpillars; plus many others; also spiders and millipedes. ,A brood parasite; its eggs and young being cared for by other bird species. In breeding season; male displays by fluffing up body feathers; partly spreading wings and tail; and bowing deeply while singing. Groups of males sometimes perch together; singing and displaying. Nest: No nest built; eggs laid in nests of other birds. 
Brown-headed-Nuthatch,Sitta pusilla,Nuthatches,Open pine woods. Pine species (such as loblolly; longleaf; slash; and pond pines) virtually always present in habitat; also other conifers including bald cypress and Atlantic white cedar. Often in pine woods mixed with deciduous trees such as sweetgum; oak; hickory; or sycamore.,Forages mainly on trunk and large limbs of pines; also on higher branches and twigs. Males may forage lower than females; descending on trunks almost to ground. May use a chip of bark as a tool to pry off other pieces of bark while searching for insects. Sometimes catches flying insects in the air. May store seeds in bark crevices.,Usually 4-6; sometimes 3-7. White; marked with reddish-brown. Typically lays 4 or 5 eggs in Florida; 5 or 6 elsewhere. Female incubates; about 14 days. Male brings food to female during incubation; male roosts in nest with female and eggs at night. Young: Both parents feed young (and so does additional "helper" at some nests). Young leave nest in 18-19 days. Usually 1 brood per year; rarely 2.,Mostly insects and seeds. Eats more insects and spiders in summer; more seeds (mainly pine seeds) in winter. ,Some nests aided by "helper;" an additional male that brings food to female on nest; also to young after eggs hatch. Nest: Both sexes help excavate nest cavity in dead tree; usually in pine; sometimes in deciduous tree or fence post near pine forest. Pair may begin several excavations before completing one for nest. Will also use birdhouses; old woodpecker holes; sometimes competes for nest sites with Eastern Bluebird. Nest sites average about 5' above ground; rarely more than 15' high. Nest in cavity made of grass; bark fibers; hair; feathers; also "wings" of pine seeds. 
Budgerigar,Melopsittacus undulatus,Lovebirds and Australasian Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Buff-bellied-Hummingbird,Amazilia yucatanensis,Hummingbirds,Woods; thickets. In Texas found mostly in semi-open habitats; such as woodland edges or clearings; areas of brush and scattered trees. Sometimes around citrus groves. A regular resident of suburban neighborhoods; especially those with trees and extensive gardens.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; probably 2 weeks or longer. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar. May raise two broods per year.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Often visits red tubular flowers such as turk's-cap and red salvia. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. In Texas; the nesting season extends at least from April to August. Nest site is usually in large shrub or small deciduous tree; such as hackberry or Texas ebony; usually only a few feet above the ground. Nest (built by female) is a cup of plant fibers; stems; shreds of bark; spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged with bits of lichen; flower petals. 
Buff-breasted-Flycatcher,Empidonax fulvifrons,Tyrant Flycatchers,Open pine woods. In Arizona; breeds in open areas in the mountains between elevations of 6;000-9;000'. Mostly in pines and oaks with very open; grassy understory. Tends to be concentrated along canyons; near trees growing along streams. In Mexico; summers in open pine woods; may winter in streamside trees at lower elevations.,Forages by watching from a perch; then flying out to capture insects; then returning to the same perch or a new one. May forage high or low. Captures insects in mid-air; or takes them from foliage while hovering; may also drop to the ground to capture food there.,3-4; sometimes 2; rarely 5. Creamy white. Incubation is by female only; 14-16 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest about 15-17 days after hatching. For several days after fledging; young stay close together; are fed by parents.,Insects. Diet is not known in detail. Apparently feeds only on small insects and other arthropods; including ants; wasps; true bugs; beetles; moths; spiders; and others. ,Often nests in loose colonies. Male sings to defend nesting territory. Courtship behavior involves male and female exploring potential nest sites together. Nest site is in tree (often in pine); either at base of branch against trunk or well out on horizontal branch; averaging about 25' above the ground. Usually placed directly under an overhanging branch or group of leaves. Nest (built by female only) is open cup of spiderwebs; rootlets; and leaves; the outside decorated with lichens; leaves; flakes of bark; and feathers. Lined with fine grasses; feathers; pine needles. 
Buff-breasted-Sandpiper,Calidris subruficollis,Sandpipers,Shortgrass prairies; in summer; tundra ridges. Migrants in North America mostly on dry open ground; such as prairies; pastures; airports; stubble fields; plowed fields. Sometimes on shores of lakes or ponds; or on coastal flats; but even there it tends to be on higher and drier sections. Breeds on tundra slopes and ridges with ponds or streams nearby.,Searches for food by sight; standing still and then making short run forward to capture prey; picking up insects and other items from surface of ground.,4; rarely 2 or 3. Whitish to buff or olive; with brown marks concentrated at larger end. Incubation by female only; 23-25 days. Young: Downy young leave nest less than a day after hatching. Female tends young; but young feed themselves. Age at first flight about 16-20 days.,Mostly insects. Diet not well known; but probably mostly insects at all seasons. On breeding grounds; eats many flies (including crane flies and midges); also beetles and other insects. During migration; besides insects; also eats spiders and small crustaceans; sometimes eats seeds. ,Males gather on display grounds; or "leks;" to attract females. These leks are spread out; each male defending an area of up to several acres; rarely more than 10 males present. Male displays by raising one wing; showing off white underside. If females approach; male spreads both wings wide; points bill up; shakes body. One male may mate with several females; and male takes no part in caring for the eggs or young. Nest site is on ground; usually near water; often on a hummock of moss. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression; lined with leaves; sedges; lichens; moss. 
Buff-collared-Nightjar,Antrostomus ridgwayi,Nightjars,Desert canyons; rocky slopes. In the U.S.; found mostly around 4;000 feet elevation in rocky canyons that have trees or dense brush along drainage and sparse growth on hillsides. In Mexico; found in various kinds of dry tropical forest and brush.,Apparently forages at dusk and dawn; also on moonlit nights. Does much of its foraging by sitting on exposed perch at top of shrub or small tree and flying out to catch passing insects in midair. May also forage by flying up from the ground. Also makes longer flights of a minute or more; patrolling for insects.,2. Pale buff; heavily marked with spots of lavender and brown. Young: Development of young and care by parents not well known. If danger threatens; adult may put on a distraction display; feigning a broken wing to lure predators away.,Insects. Diet not known in detail; but undoubtedly includes large night-flying insects such as beetles and moths. ,Nesting behavior is not well known. Only a few nests have been found; mostly in Mexico. Male calls at night to defend territory and attract a mate. Nest site is on ground; usually in the shade of a shrub and often surrounded by dense thickets. No nest built; eggs laid on dead leaves or open soil. 
Bufflehead,Bucephala albeola,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; ponds; rivers; in winter; salt bays. Preferred nesting habitat is around ponds and small lakes in rather open mixed coniferous and deciduous forest; also burned areas and aspen groves; less often in pure coniferous forest; near rivers or larger lakes. In winter on sheltered bays and estuaries; also on lakes; ponds; and slow-moving rivers inland.,Forages mostly underwater. All the birds in a small flock may dive at same time. Rarely feeds with only head submerged.,8-10; sometimes 6-12. Cream to pale buff. Incubation is by female; 29-31 days; sometimes 28-33. Young: leave nest 1-2 days after hatching; are led to water by female. Young are tended by female but feed themselves. 2 broods may join; or young separated from one brood may join another. Age at first flight 50-55 days.,Varies with season and habitat. In summer and on fresh water feeds mainly on aquatic insects; on ocean feeds mainly on crustaceans. Also eats many mollusks (especially snails) in winter; and small amounts of plant material in fall. ,Males begin courtship displays by early winter; but most pairs form in spring. Displays of male include head-bobbing; wing-lifting; and short display flights; most with crest feathers fully raised. Nest site; chosen by female; is in tree cavity (especially old flicker holes); usually 2-10' above ground; sometimes up to 50'. Sometimes uses nest boxes. Same site may be used for several years. Lining of down is only nest material. 
Bullers-Shearwater,Ardenna bulleri,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Tends to concentrate at areas of strong upwelling; or where warm and cool water currents meet; bringing food to the surface. Rarely comes close to shore. Nests on islands with soil suitable for burrows or with crevices among rocky cliffs.,Food is taken at or just below surface of water. Forages by dipping to surface in flight; plunging into water from a few feet above surface; swimming with head submerged; sometimes up-ending with head down and tail up. Rarely dives underwater. May feed at night.,One. White. Incubation is by both sexes; roughly 51 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Period from hatching to departure from nest probably about 100 days.,Crustaceans; fish; squid. Diet not well known. Near breeding grounds may feed mostly on euphausiid shrimp and other crustaceans. Off California; may eat mostly small fish and squid. ,Breeds on Poor Knights Islands off North Island; New Zealand. Adults arrive there in September; most eggs laid in late November; young depart in May. Breeds in dense colonies. Adults noisy around colonies at night; may climb up into trees to take flight more easily. Nest:  Site is in burrow under tree roots or rocks; or in cave or rock crevice. Both sexes help dig burrow. Nest chamber is lined with leaves; twigs; pebbles. Where birds nest in Maori burial caves; may use human bones as nest material. 
Bullocks-Oriole,Icterus bullockii,Blackbirds and Orioles,Open woods; riverside groves. Breeds in deciduous trees in fairly open habitats; such as forest edge; isolated groves and streamside woods; especially in cottonwood trees. Readily adapts to some suburban neighborhoods if enough trees are present. Winters mostly in the tropics around forest edge and semi-open country.,Forages by searching for insects among foliage of trees and shrubs; rarely on the ground. Sometimes flies out to catch insects in midair. Visits flowers for nectar; and will come to sugar-water feeders; also attracted to pieces of fruit put out at feeders.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. Bluish white to pale gray; with brown and black markings concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 11 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 14 days after hatching.,Insects; berries; nectar. In summer feeds mostly on insects; especially caterpillars; also eats beetles; grasshoppers; crickets; wasps; bugs; and others; plus spiders. Eats many berries and wild fruits; sometimes cultivated fruit. Feeds on nectar and will take sugar-water. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. In courtship; male faces female and stretches upright; with tail spread and wings quivering and partly open. Nest site is in tall deciduous tree; suspended from the tips of slender drooping branches; usually 10-25' above the ground; can be up to 50' high. Nest (built by female; sometimes with help from male) is a hanging pouch; with its rim firmly attached to a branch; tends to be wider and deeper than the nest of Baltimore Oriole. Nest is tightly woven of plant fibers; strips of bark; vine tendrils; grass; yarn; and string; lined with fine grass; plant down; hair. 
Burrowing-Owl,Athene cunicularia,Superb Owls,Open grassland; prairies; farmland; airfields. Favors areas of flat open ground with very short grass or bare soil. Prairie-dog towns once furnished much ideal habitat in west; but these are now scarce; and the owls are found on airports; golf courses; vacant lots; industrial parks; other open areas.,Hunts mostly at dusk and at night; but does much hunting by day during breeding season. Hunts by a variety of methods; including swooping down from a perch; hovering over fields; or running along ground; then clutching prey in its talons. May catch flying insects in the air.,Typically 7-10 in west; 4-6 in Florida; can range from 3 to 12. Eggs white; becoming nest-stained. Incubation by female only; 28-30 days; male brings food for female during incubation. Young: Female remains with young most of time at first; male brings food; and female feeds it to young. After 1-2 weeks; female begins hunting also. Young may leave nest at about 6 weeks or sometimes earlier; but not capable of strong flight at first. 1 brood per year; sometimes 2 in Florida.,Mostly insects and small mammals. Diet varies with season and location. In summer in many areas; eats mostly large insects; including grasshoppers; beetles; crickets; moths; caterpillars; also scorpions; centipedes; other arthropods. For much of year; may feed mostly on small mammals (such as voles; mice; ground squirrels); some small birds. May eat many frogs; toads; lizards; and snakes; perhaps especially in Florida. ,Birds in courtship may repeatedly fly up; hover; and descend. On ground near nest burrow; male feeds female; members of pair nibble at each other's bills and preen each other's feathers. Nest site is in burrow in ground; in area surrounded by bare soil or short grass. Florida birds usually dig their own burrows; but those in west usually use old burrow left by prairie-dogs; ground squirrels; kangaroo rats; armadillos; or other animals. Burrows excavated by the owls may be up to 6-10' long; with nest in chamber at end. May line burrow entrance and nest chamber with cow manure; but no real nest built. 
Bushtit,Psaltriparus minimus,Bushtits,Oak scrub; chaparral; mixed woods; pinyons; junipers. Lives in many kinds of wooded or brushy habitats; from the lowlands to middle elevations in the mountains; including chaparral; oak forest; pinyon-juniper and pine-oak woods; streamside groves; and well-wooded suburbs and city parks. Avoids high mountains and hot desert regions; but may appear in cottonwood-willow groves along desert streams in winter.,Forages very actively in trees and shrubs; moving rapidly among foliage and small twigs; often hanging upside down at the ends of twigs while probing among pine needles or the bases of leaves. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,5-7. White. Incubation is by both parents; about 12 days. Both parents may sleep in nest at night. Young: Fed and brooded by both parents. Young leave nest about 14-15 days after hatching. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of tiny insects; especially leafhoppers; treehoppers; aphids; scale insects; caterpillars; and beetles; also wasps; ants; and many others; including eggs and pupae of many insects. Also eats some spiders; berries; and sometimes seeds. ,After winter flocks break up; pairs establish territories but do not defend them strongly; tolerating other Bushtits even near nest. If pairs are disturbed during early stages of nesting; they reportedly may abandon the effort and build a new nest; perhaps with a different mate. Nest site is in a tree or shrub; 8-35' above the ground; sometimes lower or higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is firmly attached to twigs and branches; a tightly woven hanging pocket; up to a foot long; small entrance hole near top leads to narrow passage which opens into nest chamber. Nest is made of spiderwebs; moss; grass; lichens; leaves; rootlets; twigs; inside lined with plant down; animal hair; feathers. 
Cackling-Goose,Branta hutchinsii,Ducks and Geese,Tundra in summer; lakes; marshes; and fields in winter. Nests on tundra in western Alaska and north-central Canada; as well as barren uplands on Aleutian Islands. Winters on southern lakes and marshes; often foraging in open prairies or farm fields.,forages mostly by grazing while walking on land; also feeds in water; submerging head and neck; sometimes up-ending. Feeds in flocks at most seasons.,4-6. White; soon becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by female; 25-27 days; with male standing guard nearby. Young: Parents lead young from nest 1-2 days after hatching. Young are tended by both parents; but find their own food from the start. Age at first flight about 6-7 weeks.,almost entirely plant material. Feeds on a wide variety of plants. Eats stems and shoots of grasses; sedges; aquatic plants; consumes many cultivated grains; mainly waste grains left in farm fields. ,May mate for life. Nest site (chosen by female) is usually near water; on open tundra or sometimes on cliff ledge. Nest (built by female) is a shallow scrape filled with plant material gathered from immediately around the nest; and lined with down feathers. 
Cactus-Wren,Campylorhynchus brunneicapillus,Wrens,Cactus; yucca; mesquite; arid brush; deserts. Lives in a variety of low dry habitats. Most numerous in desert; in areas with thorny shrubs and cactus; especially where cholla cactus is common; also found in mesquite brush; in towns; and locally in coastal chaparral where cactus grows.,Forages on the ground and in low trees; probing in bark crevices and among leaf litter on ground. Often forages in pairs or family groups. On the ground; often inserts bill under a leaf or small rock and lifts up to look for food underneath. Adaptable and curious; will explore possible new sources of food; learning to probe in cones of planted pines and to pick smashed insects from the front ends of parked cars.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Whitish to pale pink; heavily spotted with brown. Incubation is by female only; about 16 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 19-23 days after hatching; may remain on parents' territory for some time thereafter.,Mostly insects; some fruits and seeds. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; ants; wasps; true bugs; grasshoppers; and many others. Also eats a few spiders; and occasionally small lizards. Eats more plant material than other wrens (up to 20%); including berries; cactus fruits; seeds; some nectar. ,May mate for life; pairs remaining together all year on permanent territory. Members of pair have greeting display; perching upright with wings and tail partly spread; giving harsh calls. Male may build extra "dummy" nests while female is incubating. Adults sometimes puncture eggs of other birds nesting nearby. Nest site is in cactus (especially cholla); tree yucca; or thorny low tree such as mesquite; acacia; or paloverde; usually less than 10' above the ground; rarely up to 30'. Sometimes nests in hole in building or in large cavity in giant cactus. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky mass of weeds; grass; twigs; lined with feathers; animal hair; plant down. Nest is shaped like football lying on its side; entrance at one end; with narrow tubular passage leading to nest chamber. 
California-Condor,Gymnogyps californianus,New World Vultures,Wild open country; rugged hills. At one time; ranged over much of the west; from mountains and valleys to the coast. On its last stand in California; the condor foraged over open grassland and savannah; and nested in rugged mountainous terrain with forest and steep cliffs.,Generally forages only in warmer hours of day; spending morning and evening perched at night roost. Forages by soaring; often less than 2000' above ground; looking for carrion. May find much of its food by watching actions of other scavengers (such as vultures or ravens).,One. Whitish. Incubation is by both sexes; about 56 days. Members of pair trade places on the egg once every 1-5 days; rarely taking shifts up to 9-10 days. Young: Both parents bring food for young bird. Adult condors harass or chase away potential predators; such as ravens; Golden Eagles; and large mammals; from vicinity of nest. Young capable of flight about 5-6 months after hatching; may remain dependent on parents for at least another 6 months. This long period of dependence means that the whole nesting cycle takes more than a year; so after successfully raising one young the condors must skip one nesting season before trying again.,Carrion. Prefers recently-dead large animals; such as deer or cattle. Formerly occurred often on coast; feeding on dead whales and other marine creatures washed up on beach. ,Apparently does not breed in the wild until about 7 years old. Nest site is usually in cave or large crevice in cliff; sometimes in crevice among large rocks on steep slope; or in burned-out cavity in huge tree; such as giant sequoia. On flat bottom of cave; adult condors may make "nest" of stones; debris; gravel. 
California-Gnatcatcher,Polioptila californica,Gnatcatchers,Coastal sage scrub. In limited range on California coast; found only in coastal sage scrub. This is a habitat of low shrubs (mostly 3-6' tall); generally dominated by California sagebrush; buckwheat; salvia; and prickly-pear cactus. In Baja California; also found in other kinds of scrub.,Forages by moving about actively in shrubs and low trees; searching for insects. Sometimes hovers to pick items from foliage. Unlike Blue-gray Gnatcatcher; rarely flies out to catch insects in mid-air.,4; sometimes 3-5. Bluish white; finely dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 14 days. On hot days; adults may stand on nest and shade the eggs. Young: Fed by both parents. Young leave the nest about 15-16 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of small insects; including true bugs; beetles; caterpillars; scale insects; wasps; ants; flies; moths; small grasshoppers; and many others; also some spiders. May eat small berries at times. ,Adults often remain together in pairs throughout the year on permanent territories. In California; nesting season is from late February to mid-July. Brown-headed Cowbirds often lay eggs in nests of this bird; and the gnatcatchers may wind up raising only young cowbirds. Nest site is in dense low shrub; usually less than 4' above the ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is a compact cup of grass; bark strips; leaves; spiderwebs; plant down; and other items; lined with fine plant fibers; feathers; and animal hair. 
California-Gull,Larus californicus,Gulls and Terns,Seacoasts; lakes; farms; urban centers. Breeds in the interior at lakes and marshes; often foraging for insects around farms; plowed fields. Some winter inland around major lakes and rivers; but most are coastal at that season; frequenting beaches; docks; garbage dumps; fields. Sometimes common well offshore in winter.,Forages while walking; wading; swimming; or flying. May hover and dip down to pick items from surface of land or water. Sometimes follows plow in farm fields to pick up insects exposed in the furrows.,2-3; sometimes 1-5. Clutches of more than 3 result from 2 females laying in same nest. Eggs brown; olive; gray; or buff; blotched with dark brown or gray. Incubation is by both parents; 23-27 days. Young: May leave nest when a few days old; but remain in immediate area. Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young can fly at about 45 days after hatching.,Varied; includes insects; fish; eggs; refuse. Summer diet inland is mostly insects; also worms; spiders; rodents; eggs and young of other birds; and carrion. On coast; eats fish and other marine life; also scavenges for refuse around garbage dumps; fishing piers. ,Breeds in colonies; sometimes very large; and sometimes mixed with Ring-billed Gulls or other birds; the nests may be quite close together. Nest site is on ground near lake or marsh; often on island. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow depression; usually lined with weeds; grass; debris; feathers. 
California-Quail,Callipepla californica,New World Quail,Broken chaparral; woodland edges; coastal scrub; parks; farms. May be most common in open oak woodland and in streamside growth bordered by chaparral; but also found in suburbs; semi-desert situations; pinyon-juniper woods; grassland; coastal sage scrub. Where introduced farther inland; may be in other brushy habitats. Avoids mountains.,Forages mostly by picking up items from ground; often scratching on ground; and picking leaves from plants. Along roads; may feed on acorns that have been cracked open by passing cars. In neighborhoods with good plant cover; comes into yards to eat grain or birdseed.,10-16; usually 13-14. Dull white to pale buff; variably marked with brown. Two females sometimes lay eggs in same nest. Incubation is by female only; about 18-23 days. Young: Downy young leave nest within a day after hatching. Both parents tend young; with female often brooding them when small; male perching high and acting as sentinel; young feed themselves. Young can fly short distances at age of 10 days but are not full grown until later. One brood per year; two in years with good food supply.,Mostly seeds and leaves. Feeds on a wide variety of plants; but especially annual weeds; eating the seeds; leaves; and fresh shoots. Also eats acorns; berries; flowers; bulbs; insects. ,During breeding season; males call loudly to advertise territory. In courtship; male postures with wings drooped; tail spread; bobs head; and may rush at female. Nest site is usually on ground; under a shrub or brushpile; or next to a log or other cover. Sometimes nests above ground; on broken-off branch or in old nest of another bird. Typical nest on ground (probably built by female) is a shallow depression; lined with grass and leaves. 
California-Scrub-Jay,Aphelocoma californica,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Oak woodland; oak scrub; riverside woods; and foothill forests of pinyon pine. Often very common in well-wooded suburbs and parks.,Forages on the ground and in trees; singly or in family units during breeding season; sometimes in flocks at other seasons. Often harvests acorns and buries them; perhaps to retrieve them later.,3-5; sometimes 2-7. Usually light green; spotted with olive or brown; sometimes paler gray or green with large reddish-brown spots. Incubation is by female; about 17-18 days. Male sometimes feeds female during incubation.,Omnivorous. Diet varies with season. Eats a wide variety of insects; especially in summer; as well as a few spiders and snails. Moth caterpillars make up a major percentage of the items fed to the young. Winter diet may be mostly acorns and other seeds; nuts; and berries. Also eats some rodents; eggs and young of other birds; and small reptiles and amphibians.,Unlike the Florida Scrub-Jay and Mexican Jay; this species breeds in isolated pairs; not cooperative flocks. Pairs typically stay together all year on their permanent territory. Nest site is in a shrub or tree; usually fairly low; 5-15 above the ground; but sometimes higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is a well-built; thick-walled cup of twigs and grass; lined with rootlets and sometimes with animal hair.
California-Thrasher,Toxostoma redivivum,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Chaparral; foothills; valley thickets; parks; gardens. Within its range; found in practically any lowland habitat with dense low brush. Most common in chaparral; also occurs in streamside thickets and in suburban neighborhoods that have enough vegetation. Extends into edges of desert regions; and in chaparral in mountains up to about 6;000'.,Forages mostly on the ground; using its heavy curved bill to flip leaf-litter aside and to dig in the soil.,3-4; sometimes 2. Pale blue; evenly spotted with pale brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest after about 12-14 days; are unable to fly well for several more days. Male may care for young from 1st brood while female begins laying 2nd clutch. 2 broods per year; perhaps sometimes 3.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including ants; wasps; bees; beetles; caterpillars; moths; and many others. Also eats some spiders and centipedes. Berries and small fruits are important in diet; and eats seeds; acorns; and other plant material. Will come to bird feeders for miscellaneous scraps. ,Pairs may remain together on territory all year. Male sings to defend nesting territory; usually from top of shrub or tree; song often includes imitations of other birds. Nest: Placed in a dense shrub or extensive thickets; less than 10' above the ground; usually 2-4' up. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky open cup of sticks and twigs; lined with fine grass; weeds; rootlets; strips of bark; and other soft items. 
California-Towhee,Melozone crissalis,New World Sparrows,Brushy areas; chaparral; coastal scrub; gardens. Found in a wide variety of dense low habitats; including streamside thickets; chaparral; pinyon-juniper woods; coastal sage scrub; semi-desert scrub; edges and openings in oak woodland; and well-vegetated gardens and city parks.,Forages mostly on the ground; sometimes scratching among the leaf-litter. Often comes to bird-feeders; but may do much of its foraging on the ground under the feeding tray.,3-4; rarely 2-5. Pale bluish-white; marked with brown and black. Incubation is by the female; about 11 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young may leave the nest after as little as 8 days; before they are able to fly well; remain with parents for several more weeks. A pair may raise 2 or 3 broods per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. Majority of diet; especially in winter; consists of seeds of weeds and grasses; also some waste grain. Also eats insects (including caterpillars and beetles); especially in summer; and eats some berries and small fruits. Young are fed mostly or entirely on insects. ,May mate for life; and pairs may remain together on breeding territory all year. Male is very aggressive in defending this territory; actively attacking intruding males or even his own reflection. Nest site is usually in a dense shrub or low tree; typically 4-12' above the ground; but may be very low (sometimes on the ground) or up to 30' or higher. Nest is a bulky open cup; rather loosely made of twigs; grass; weeds; strips of bark; lined with finer grass; rootlets; animal hair. 
Calliope-Hummingbird,Selasphorus calliope,Hummingbirds,Forest glades; canyons; usually in mountains. Breeds mostly from 4;000 feet up to near treeline. Favors open shrubby areas; especially near streams; and may be most common in second growth several years after fire or logging. Winters mostly in pine-oak woods of mountains in Mexico; and migrants occur both in mountains and lowlands.,Often visits flowers growing within inches of the ground. At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and capture them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; 15-16 days. Young: Female feeds the young; and broods them to keep them warm between feeding bouts and at night. Age of young at first flight about 18-21 days.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Male establishes breeding territory and drives other males away. Male performs a U-shaped courtship flight display; rising 30-100 feet and diving steeply; with popping and zinging sound at bottom of dive; then rising again. Male also hovers before female with throat feathers flared out. Nest site is usually in a pine or other conifer; sometimes in deciduous shrub. Usually 6-40 feet up; can be much higher. Sometimes built on base of old pine cone. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of plant down; moss; bark fibers; spider webs; with the outside camouflaged with bits of lichen. 
Canada-Goose,Branta canadensis,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; ponds; bays; marshes; fields. Very diverse; using different habitats in different regions; always nests near water; winters where feeding areas are within commuting distance of water. Nesting habitats include tundra; fresh marshes; salt marshes; lakes in wooded country. Often feeds in open fields; especially in winter. In recent years; also resident in city parks; suburban ponds.,forages mostly by grazing while walking on land; also feeds in water; submerging head and neck; sometimes up-ending. Feeds in flocks at most seasons.,4-7; sometimes 2-11. White; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by female; 25-28 days; male stands guard nearby. Young: Parents lead young from nest 1-2 days after hatching. Young are tended by both parents; but feed themselves. Age at first flight varies; usually 7-9 weeks; tending to be longer in the largest forms.,almost entirely plant material. Feeds on very wide variety of plants. Eats stems and shoots of grasses; sedges; aquatic plants; also seeds and berries; consumes many cultivated grains (especially on refuges; where crops planted for geese). Occasionally eats some insects; mollusks; crustaceans; sometimes small fish. ,May mate for life. Male defends territory with displays; including lowering head almost to ground with bill slightly raised and open; hissing; also pumps head up and down while standing. Nest site (chosen by female) is usually on slightly elevated dry ground near water; with good visibility. Much variation; may nest on cliff ledges; on muskrat houses; in trees; on artificial platforms. Nest (built by female) is slight depression with shallow bowl of sticks; grass; weeds; moss; lined with down. 
Canada-Jay,Perisoreus canadensis,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Spruce and fir forests. Found in various kinds of coniferous and mixed forest; but rarely occurs where there are no spruce trees. Habitats include black spruce bogs in eastern Canada; forests of aspen and Engelmann spruce in Rockies; Sitka spruce and Douglas-fir on northwest coast.,An opportunist in its foraging; flying from tree to tree searching for food. Boldly enters campsites and even cabins to steal food. Will attack rodents and small birds. Sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air. Regularly eats carrion; especially in winter; coming to kills left by wolves or other predators. Stores food items throughout the year; especially in summer; and may live on these caches in severe winter weather; the bird's sticky saliva helps it stick pieces of food in bark crevices and other spots. Can carry food items; even fairly large ones; in flight; sometimes carrying them with its feet.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale gray to greenish; dotted with brown; olive; or reddish. Incubation is by female only; about 18-22 days. Male sometimes brings food to female on nest. Young: Female broods young most of time at first while male brings food; later; both parents bring food to nest. Young leave nest at about 22-24 days; remain with parents for at least another month.,Omnivorous. Diet is remarkably varied; includes insects; spiders; berries; seeds; fungi; small rodents; birds' eggs; and carrion. ,Mated pairs stay together all year; and defend permanent territories. Early in breeding season; male may perform courtship feeding of female. Nesting begins remarkably early; during late winter; while breeding grounds still snow-covered. Nest site is in dense conifer; close to trunk at base of branch; usually fairly low; averaging about 15' above the ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky flat cup of twigs; lichens; strips of bark; and caterpillar webs; lined with softer materials including animal hair and feathers. 
Canada-Warbler,Cardellina canadensis,Wood Warblers,Forest undergrowth; shady thickets. Breeds in mature mixed hardwoods of extensive forests and streamside thickets. Prefers to nest in moist habitat: in luxuriant undergrowth; near swamps; on stream banks; in rhododendron thickets; in deep; rocky ravines and in moist deciduous second-growth. Winters in a variety of habitats in South America; from forest undergrowth to scrub.,Very active in foraging; does more flycatching than most warblers. Typically flushes insects from foliage while foraging on twigs and leaves; then frequently darts out catch escaping insects on the wing. Also searches on the ground among fallen leaves. In winter in the tropics; forages in mixed flocks with other birds; usually 3-30' above ground in denser foliage.,4; sometimes 3-5. Creamy white with brown spots. Incubation is probably by female; possibly with help from male; length of the incubation period is not well known. Young: Both parents care for nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known.,Largely insects. Feeds on many kinds of insects; including beetles; mosquitoes; flies; moths; and smooth caterpillars such as cankerworms; also spiders. ,Males arrive on breeding grounds during the first two weeks of May. Sometimes pairs may arrive together; as migrants have been seen traveling in pairs in Central America. Nest: Placed on or within 6" of the ground; on sphagnum hummocks; in hollows in streambanks; on moss-covered logs; or in cavities among the upturned roots of fallen trees. Nest (built by female) is bulky open cup; loosely constructed of dead leaves or leaf skeletons; bark strips; grasses; weeds; ferns; lined with fern roots; horsehair; and plant fibers. 
Canvasback,Aythya valisineria,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; salt bays; estuaries; in summer; fresh marshes. For nesting shallow marshes in prairie regions. Also large marshy lake complexes to the north; in boreal forest regions; and a few to edge of tundra. In migration mostly on large lakes. Winters mainly near coast; on protected bays and estuaries; also on lakes in interior.,Dives for food; usually in water only a few feet deep. In very shallow water may stir up bottom sediments with feet; then up-end to feed; also takes some food from surface of water.,7-12. Olive-gray. Redheads often lay eggs in Canvasback nests; when this happens; female Canvasback is likely to lay fewer eggs. Incubation is by female only; 23-28 days. Young: several hours after hatching; young are led to open water by female. Young feed themselves. Female remains with young for several weeks; but departs before they fledge; young are capable of flight roughly 60-70 days after hatching.,Mostly plant material. Mainly eats the leaves; roots; and seeds of aquatic plants: pondweeds; wild celery; sedges; grasses; and others. Also eats mollusks; insects; some small fish. In one study in summer; adult males continued to eat mostly plants; while females and young fed on aquatic insect larvae. ,Pair formation occurs mostly at stopover points during spring migration. Several males may court 1 female. Displays of male include snapping the head far back and then thrusting it forward; while giving clicking and cooing callnotes. Nest site is in marsh; in stands of dense vegetation above shallow water. Sometimes on dry ground. Nest (built by female) is basketlike and bulky; built of dead vegetation; lined with down. 
Canyon-Towhee,Melozone fusca,New World Sparrows,Brushy areas; chaparral; desert foothills; canyons; pinyon-juniper woods. Habitat varies in different parts of range; but always in brushy areas; avoiding forest and open desert. Found in open pinyon-juniper woodland; chaparral on dry hillsides; grasslands with cholla and mesquite; thickets of scrub oak; similar habitats.,Forages mostly or entirely on the ground. Often scratches in the dirt; but not as much as some towhees. Frequently seen feeding under things; such as logs; bushes; or parked cars.,3-4; sometimes 2-5; rarely 6. Off-white; spotted and scrawled with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; probably about 11 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young may leave the nest before they are able to fly; and climb about in bushes while waiting to be fed. A pair of adults may raise 2 or sometimes 3 broods per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet includes mostly seeds in winter; more insects in summer. Young are fed almost entirely on insects. May eat some berries and small fruits at times. ,May mate for life; and pairs often stay together all year on permanent territories. Does not seem very aggressive in defense of nesting territory; sometimes tolerating intrusion by other towhees. Nest site is usually in small tree; dense shrub; or cactus; 3-12' above the ground; often placed at the base of a branch against the trunk. Nest is a bulky open cup; solidly built of twigs; weeds; grass; lined with leaves; fine grass; strips of bark; and animal hair. 
Canyon-Wren,Catherpes mexicanus,Wrens,Cliffs; canyons; rockslides; stone buildings. Generally around areas with steep rock faces and some dense low growth; as in steep-walled canyons or around the bases of cliffs; also in boulder fields and sometimes around stone buildings. May move into denser streamside vegetation away from cliffs in winter.,Forages by hopping actively about among rock piles; up and down faces of steep rocky cliffs; or through very dense undergrowth in canyons. Does much of its foraging in sheltered spots; such as under rocks or in crevices. Uses its very long bill to probe deeply into crevices among the rocks. Usually forages alone; sometimes in pairs. Has been seen stealing spiders from the nest of a predatory wasp.,5; sometimes 4-6; rarely 3-7. White; lightly dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by female; 12-18 days. Male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest at about 15 days; may remain with parents for several weeks or more.,Mostly insects and spiders. Feeds on a variety of insects; including termites; ants; beetles; leafhoppers; and others; also spiders. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing. Nest site is usually in hole or crevice in rocky cliff; among rock piles; on ledge in cave; sometimes in crevices in stone buildings; in abandoned sheds; in hollow stumps; or similarly protected sites. Nest (built by both sexes) has foundation of twigs; grass; bark chips; and other coarse items; topped with cup of softer materials such as fine grass; moss; leaves; spiderwebs; plant down; animal hair; feathers. May add odd debris to nest. 
Cape-May-Warbler,Setophaga tigrina,Wood Warblers,Spruce forest; other trees in migration. Breeds in spruce forest; either in pure stands or mixed with firs or other trees; generally in more open woods or near the forest edge. During migration often favors conifers; but also forages in deciduous trees and thickets. In Florida and the West Indies in winter; often feeds in the crowns of palm trees.,On the breeding grounds; feeds mainly out at the tips of branches of spruce trees. Will hang head downward at the tips of branches to pick insects from the undersides of needles. Often flies out several feet to catch flying insects in mid-air. In winter; may defend flowering plants from hummingbirds and other nectar feeders.,6-7; sometimes 4-9. May lay more eggs during outbreaks of spruce budworm. Eggs whitish with red-brown spots. Probably incubated by female; unknown number of days. Young: Probably fed by both parents. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known.,Mostly insects; some fruit; nectar. Diet includes spruce budworms; parasitic wasps and flies; ants; bees; small moths; beetles; leafhoppers; also spiders. In migration; may pierce grapes and drink the juice. Also feeds on sap from holes drilled by sapsuckers. Unique among warblers; the Cape May has a tubular tongue; in winter; it feeds heavily on flower nectar and fruit juices. ,Male defends nesting territory against other Cape Mays and other warbler species. During courtship; male displays by flying above female with wings held stiffly out.  Nest: Placed very close to the top of a 35-60' spruce or fir; in thick foliage against trunk. Nest is cup-shaped and made of moss; vines; weeds; lined thickly with feathers and fur. Probably built by female. Nest is very hard to find because female flies into the tree low and then sneaks up the trunk to enter the nest; when leaving it; she moves down the trunk instead of flying directly away. 
Carolina-Chickadee,Poecile carolinensis,Chickadees and Titmice,Mixed and deciduous woods; river groves; shade trees. Mostly in deciduous forest; also in pine woods with good mixture of oak or other leafy trees; and will nest in well-wooded suburbs. Habitat like that of Black-capped Chickadee; where the two species overlap in the Appalachians; Carolina Chickadee lives at lower elevations.,Forages mostly by hopping among twigs and branches and gleaning food from surface; often hanging upside down to reach underside of branches. Sometimes takes food while hovering; and may fly out to catch insects in mid-air. Stores food items; retrieving them later. Comes to bird feeders for seeds or suet.,5-8. White; with fine dots of reddish brown often concentrated around larger end. Incubation is probably by female only; 11-13 days. Adult bird disturbed on nest makes loud hiss like that of a snake. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 13-17 days after hatching.,Mostly insects; seeds; and berries. Probably eats more vegetable matter (seeds and berries) in winter than in summer. Caterpillars make up major part of diet in warmer months; also feeds on moths; true bugs; beetles; aphids; various other insects and spiders. Also eats weed and tree seeds; berries; small fruits. ,May mate for life. Pairs probably form in fall and remain together as part of winter flock. When flocks break up in late winter; pair establishes nesting territory. Nest site is in hole in tree; typically enlargement of small natural cavity in dead wood; sometimes old woodpecker hole or nesting box; usually 5-15' above the ground. In natural cavity; both sexes help excavate or enlarge the interior. Nest (probably built by female) has foundation of bark strips or other matter; lining of softer material such as plant down and animal hair. 
Carolina-Wren,Thryothorus ludovicianus,Wrens,Tangles; undergrowth; suburbs; gardens; towns. Common in the undergrowth of deciduous or mixed woods; and in thickets along forest edges. Also lives in suburban areas; especially where some dense low growth and tangles have been left undisturbed.,Usually forages in pairs; actively exploring low tangles; foliage; bark of trunks and branches; and the ground. Sometimes comes to bird feeders for suet; peanuts; other items.,5-6;; sometimes 4-8. White; with brown blotches usually concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; 12-16 days; male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest about 12-14 days after hatching. 2 broods per year; or 3 in south.,Mostly insects. Feeds primarily on insects of many kinds; especially caterpillars; beetles; true bugs; grasshoppers; crickets; and many others. Also feeds on many spiders; some millipedes and snails. Sometimes catches and eats small lizards or tree frogs. Also eats berries and small fruits; especially in winter; and some seeds. ,May mate for life. Pairs remain together all year; defending permanent territories; male and female often sing in duet. Nest site is in any kind of cavity; including natural hollows in trees or stumps; old woodpecker holes; crevices among upturned roots of fallen trees; sometimes in middle of brushpile; also in nest boxes; crevices in buildings; on shelf in garage; many other artificial sites. Usually less than 10' above the ground. Nest is bulky mass of twigs; leaves; weeds; with lining of softer material such as moss; grass; animal hair; feathers. A piece of snakeskin is frequently added. Often a domed nest; with entrance on side. Both sexes help build; female adds most of lining. 
Caspian-Tern,Hydroprogne caspia,Gulls and Terns,Large lakes; coastal waters; beaches; bays. Found on both fresh and salt water; favoring protected waters such as bays; lagoons; rivers; lakes; not usually foraging over open sea. Inland; more likely on large lakes than on small ponds. Nests on open ground on islands; coasts.,When foraging flies high over water; hovers; then plunges to catch fish below surface. Less often flies low; dips down to catch prey at water's surface. May steal food from other birds.,1-3; rarely 4 or 5. Pale buff; spotted with brown or black. Incubation is by both parents (female may do more); 20-22 days. Young: May leave nest a few days after hatching; move to nearby shore. If colony is undisturbed; young may remain at nest until ready to fly. Both parents bring food for young. Age at first flight about 30-35 days; young may remain with parents as long as 8 months.,Mostly fish. Often concentrates on a few abundant fish species in a given locale (for example; shiner perch on California coast; alewife on Great Lakes). Also eats insects; sometimes eggs or young of other birds. ,First breeds at age of 3 years. Nests in colonies; sometimes in isolated pairs. Male may fly low over colony carrying fish; female follows. On ground; courtship feeding (male feeds female). Nest site is on bare ground; among driftwood or debris; perhaps sometimes on floating mats of dead vegetation. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow depression; sometimes with rim or lining of debris. 
Cassia-Crossbill,Loxia sinesciuris,Finches,NA,Like other crossbills; usually forages in flocks. Clambers about over the cones of lodgepole pines; using its odd crossed bill tip to pry the cone scales apart to get at the seeds inside.,NA,Feeds mainly on the seeds of lodgepole pine.,Unlike other crossbills; which may nest at almost any season; Cassia Crossbills are consistent in their timing. They usually begin building their open cup-shaped nests in late March or early April; and the breeding season ends by late July. 
Cassins-Auklet,Ptychoramphus aleuticus,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; colonizes sea islands. May use any kind of island for nesting (barren or forested; steep or level) as long as no predatory mammals are present. Otherwise at sea; often near nesting islands or in upwellings over continental shelf; but also far out over deep water.,Forages while swimming underwater. May feed by day or night. Can dive to more than 120' below surface.,One. Creamy white; sometimes becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; usually 38-39 days; sometimes as long as 57 days. Young: Both parents visit at night to feed young by regurgitation. Young bird nibbles at white spot on parent's bill to elicit feeding. At 41-50 days after hatching; young make first flight and go to water; able to swim and dive immediately. Usually 1 brood per year; sometimes 2.,Mostly small crustaceans. Diet in breeding season includes euphausiid shrimp; amphipods; copepods; some small fish and squid; diet at other seasons not well known. ,Usually first breeds at age 3 years; sometimes earlier. Pairs usually form in late winter. Courtship displays include mutual bowing and head-bobbing; moving head from side to side; touching bills. Nest site is in burrow excavated in soil or in natural crevice; sometimes under debris or driftwood. Both members of pair take part in excavating burrow. Little or no nest material added. Nest re-used in following years by same pair. 
Cassins-Finch,Haemorhous cassinii,Finches,Conifers in high mountains; lower levels in winter. Breeds mostly in mountain forests of conifers; especially spruce and fir; also in pine and Douglas-fir in some areas and sometimes in pinyon-juniper woods. Often at very high elevations; near treeline in mountains. Winters in mountain forests of conifers; sometimes in open woods of lower valleys.,Does much foraging up in trees; especially when ground is snow-covered; also feeds in weedy growth and on ground. Except when nesting; often forages in small flocks.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Bluish green; with brown and black spots often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 12-14 days. Male often feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 2 weeks after hatching; and parents and young may promptly leave nesting area.,Mostly seeds; buds; berries. Feeds mainly on vegetable material. Buds of various trees often staple items in diet; also eats seeds of many trees (especially conifers) and some weed seeds. Feeds on berries and small fruits when available. Also eats some insects; perhaps mainly in summer. ,Numbers breeding in an area often change from one year to the next; possibly in response to food supplies. May nest in small colonies. Male often does not defend much of a nesting territory; instead simply staying close to female and driving away rival males. Nest: Usually placed in large conifer; commonly about 30-40' above ground; may be as low as 10' or as high as 80' up; sometimes in aspen or other deciduous tree. Nest (probably built by female) is open cup made of twigs; weeds; rootlets; strips of bark; lined with fine grass; plant fibers; animal hair; sometimes decorated with lichens. 
Cassins-Kingbird,Tyrannus vociferans,Tyrant Flycatchers,Semi-open high country; pine-oak mountains; groves. In breeding season favors more wooded habitat than most kingbirds; and ranges to higher elevations; although in places it overlaps with Western Kingbird. Nests in open pine forest; pinyon-juniper woodland; oak woodland; and streamside trees; at lower elevation may nest in groves of eucalyptus. During migration and winter can be found in more open habitats.,From a perch in a tree or on an exposed wire; flies out to capture flying insects in mid-air. May also fly out and hover while picking insects or other arthropods from leaves or from the ground.,3-4; up to 5. Creamy white with brownish mottling; markings often concentrated near large end. Incubation is by female; about 18 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest after 14-17 days. Usually 1 brood per year; may raise 2 in southern part of range.,Mostly insects; some berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including wasps; beetles; caterpillars; moths; grasshoppers; true bugs; flies; and many others; as well as some spiders. Also eats some berries and fruits; more than most flycatchers. ,Male has a fast zigzag courtship flight. Members of pair may perch together in nest tree; calling and quivering wings. Adults actively harass larger birds (such as ravens and hawks) in vicinity of nest; but may tolerate other species of kingbirds nearby. Nest site is in a large tree such as sycamore; cottonwood; oak; or pine; placed on a horizontal or near-horizontal branch; often well out from the trunk. Usually 20-50' above the ground but occasionally lower and sometimes much higher. Nest is a bulky cup of twigs; weed stems; rootlets; leaves; feathers; hair; and debris; lined with finer plant fibers and other material. 
Cassins-Sparrow,Peucaea cassinii,New World Sparrows,Desert grassland; brushy fields. Breeds in a variety of situations having good ground cover of grass and low shrubs; ranges from open grassland with only scattered shrubs to brushy areas with grassy understory. In migration and winter; also found in pure grassland; brushy areas; deserts.,Forages mostly or entirely on the ground; hopping about in relatively open areas; taking items from the ground or from plant stems.,3-5; usually 4. White; unmarked. Details of incubation are not well known. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known.,Mainly insects and seeds. Summer diet is partly to mostly insects; especially grasshoppers; caterpillars; moths; and beetles; also many others. Young are fed almost entirely on insects. Also eats seeds; especially in fall and winter; mainly those of weeds and grasses. ,Somewhat irregular in its nesting; especially in western and northern parts of range; may appear in numbers and breed only in years with good rainfall. Male advertises territory with flight song display; flying up to about 20' and then gliding and fluttering down; while singing. In courtship; male may chase female; or may display with wings and tail partly spread and fluttering. Nest site is usually on the ground; well hidden among weeds or at the base of a bush. Sometimes up to a foot above ground in a low shrub. Nest is an open cup made of dry grass; weed stems; bark; plant fibers; lined with fine grass. 
Cassins-Vireo,Vireo cassinii,Vireos,Coniferous; deciduous; and mixed woods. Breeds in rather open woods. Often found in oaks near the coast; in ponderosa pines and Douglas-firs in the interior; but may be in mixed coniferous-deciduous woods anywhere. Migrants occur in any kind of woodland.,Forages rather deliberately in trees; searching for insects along branches and twigs as well as among leaves. Sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air; or searches for items on bark of major limbs.,3-5; usually 4. Whitish; lightly spotted with brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 12-14 days. Nests are often parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 2 weeks after hatching.,Mostly insects. In summer feeds almost entirely on insects. True bugs (including stink bugs; treehoppers; and leafhoppers) are major items in diet; so are caterpillars; beetles; wasps; bees; ants; and others; also spiders. May eat a few small fruits and berries in winter. ,Male sings frequently throughout the day to defend nesting territory. In courtship display; male may fluff up plumage and bob his body up and down. Nest: Placed in horizontal fork of branch in tree; usually near the tip; and often 15 to 20' above the ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is a rather bulky open cup; suspended by its rim. Nest is made of grass; strips of bark; rootlets; lined with fine grasses and plant fibers. Outside of nest may be decorated with moss; lichens; pieces of paper. 
Cattle-Egret,Bubulcus ibis,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Farms; marshes; highway edges; often associates with cattle. Widespread in any kind of open country; including pastures; plowed fields; lawns; roadsides. Also in aquatic habitats; including flooded fields; marshes. Nests in trees or shrubs; in colonies with other herons and egrets.,Usually forages in flocks in dry fields; very often in association with grazing animals -- usually cattle or horses in North America; but on other continents also elephants; camels; zebras; deer; many others. Insects are flushed from grass by animals; caught by egrets. At times; Cattle Egrets will follow tractors or even lawnmowers for the same result.,3-4; sometimes 1-9. Pale blue. Incubation is by both sexes; 21-26 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young begin to climb about near nest after 15-20 days; begin to fly at 25-30 days; and become independent at about 45 days.,Mostly insects. When associating with grazing animals in fields; diet is mostly large insects; especially grasshoppers; crickets; flies; also frogs; spiders; moths. Elsewhere may feed on crayfish; earthworms; snakes; nestling birds; eggs; sometimes fish. May scavenge for edible refuse in dumps. ,Usually first breeds at age of 2-3 years. Breeds in colonies; usually joining colonies already established by other herons and egrets despite very different feeding habitat. Male establishes pairing territory (in or near colony) and displays there to attract mate. Displays include stretching neck and raising plumes while swaying from side to side; making short flights with exaggerated deep wingbeats. Nest:  Site is in colony; in trees or shrubs; often in swamps or on island. Nest (built mostly by female; with materials mostly brought by male) is platform or shallow bowl of sticks; often with green leafy twigs added. 
Cave-Swallow,Petrochelidon fulva,Swallows,Semi-open country. Forages over any kind of open or semi-open terrain; especially near water. Breeding was formerly limited by scarcity of nest sites in natural caves or sinkholes. Now nests under bridges and in culverts; buildings; silos; many other artificial sites; allowing species to spread into new habitats.,Forages almost entirely in flight. May forage low over water or may forage much higher; mainly in clear warm weather. Often forages in flocks.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. White; finely spotted with brown and purple. Incubation is probably by both parents; thought to be about 15 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest at about 20-26 days.,Insects. Diet not known in detail; but feeds on a wide variety of flying insects; including beetles; flies; true bugs; wasps; bees; winged ants; grasshoppers; lacewings; moths; and others. ,Typically nests in colonies; sometimes with hundreds of pairs. Nest: Natural site is on steep wall of cave or sinkhole; in area away from entrance but with at least some light. Artificial sites are on vertical surfaces in culverts; under bridges; or in buildings; in Yucatan Peninsula; may nest in ancient Mayan temples. In well-sheltered sites; nests may last for years and be used repeatedly. Nest (built by both sexes) is an open cup of mud plastered against wall. Birds in natural sites gather mud on cave bottom; where it often contains much bat guano. Nest is lined with grass; bark fibers; plant down; and feathers. 
Cedar-Waxwing,Bombycilla cedrorum,Waxwings,Open woodlands; fruiting trees; orchards; in winter; widespread; including towns. Breeding habitat is influenced by availability of fruiting trees and shrubs; often most common in "edge" situations; as along forest edges; streamsides; overgrown fields; edges of swamps; suburban yards. In winter; may be in any wooded or semi-open area where berries are abundant.,Except when nesting; almost always forages in flocks. May hover briefly while plucking berries or taking insects from foliage. Often flies out to catch insects in mid-air.,3-5; rarely 2-6. Pale gray to bluish gray; finely spotted with brown and black. Incubation is probably by female only; averaging about 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 14-18 days after hatching. 2 broods per year.,Mostly berries and insects. Majority of annual diet is berries and small fruits; feeds on very wide variety of berries; with some important sources including juniper; dogwood; and wild cherries. Also eats some flowers and will drink oozing sap. Eats many insects in summer; including beetles; caterpillars; ants. Young nestlings are fed mostly insects at first; then more berries after a few days. ,In many areas; nesting is late; not beginning until mid-summer. Only a small area is defended as territory; so birds may nest near others in small colonies. In courtship; two birds may perch close together; posturing; touching bills; and passing food items back and forth. Nest: Placed in tree; on horizontal limb or in fork; usually 6-20' above the ground but can be lower or much higher (up to 50'). Nest (built by both sexes) is a rather loosely built open cup of grass; weeds; twigs; plant fibers; lined with finer materials such as moss; rootlets; fine grass; hair. 
Cerulean-Warbler,Setophaga cerulea,Wood Warblers,Deciduous forests; especially in river valleys. Breeds in mature hardwoods either in uplands or along streams. Prefers elm; soft maple; oak; birch; hickory; beech; basswood; linden; sycamore; or black ash. Nests only in tall forest with clear understory. In winter in tropics; found mostly in forest and woodland borders in foothills and lower slopes.,Forages mostly high in trees; moving rapidly from limb to limb; searching among foliage and twigs for insects. Also flies out to catch flying insects in mid-air. In winter in the tropics; scattered individuals forage with mixed flocks; ranging from low to high in the trees.,3-5; usually 4. Gray or creamy off-white; with spots of brown. Incubation by female only; probably 12-13 days. Apparently does not often host cowbird eggs where it can nest in unbroken mature forest; but may be parasitized more frequently in forest fragments. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which the young leave the nest is not well known.,Insects. The diet is not well known; undoubtedly feeds mostly or entirely on insects; like most warblers. Has been observed feeding on caterpillars. ,Males arrive on breeding grounds near the middle of May. Nesting behavior has been little studied; owing to the difficulty of observing the nests. Nest: Placed on horizontal branch of hardwood; far from trunk and usually high; 15-90' up in tree. Favors oak; maple; basswood; elm; hickory; sycamore; beech; or tulip trees. Nest is a small; shallow open cup (probably built by female); made of bark strips; grasses; weeds; spider silk; and lichen; lined with moss and hair. 
Chara-de-Collar,Aphelocoma californica,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Estribaciones de montaas; chaparrales de roble; bosques de ros; pinos pioneros; junperos y algunos suburbios. Esta especie se encuentra en muchos tipos de campos con matorrales; pero generalmente donde abundan los robles. En el oeste; vive en bosques de pinos pioneros; junperos y algunos robles: las semillas de los pinos pioneros quizs reemplazan las bellotas.,Busca alimento en la tierra y en rboles; generalmente en bandadas. A menudo; cosecha bellotas y las entierra para comerlas luego.,De 3 a 6 y; a veces; de 2 a 7. Por lo general; son de color verde claro; con manchas verde oliva o pardas. A veces son de color gris ms plido o verde; con manchas grandes de color pardusco. La incubacin la realiza solo la hembra; y dura de 15 a 17 das. El macho alimenta a la hembra durante la incubacin.,Omnvoro. La dieta vara segn la estacin y la regin. Come una amplia variedad de insectos; especialmente en verano; as como tambin araas y caracoles. En invierno ingiere bellotas; semillas de pino; otras semillas; frutos secos y bayas. Tambin come roedores; huevos; cras de otras aves; reptiles y anfibios pequeos.,A diferencia de la chara floridana y de la chara mexicana; esta especie se reproduce en parejas aisladas; no en bandadas cooperativas. Nido: Hace nidos en rboles o arbustos; por lo general a baja altura; entre 1;5 y 9 metros por encima del suelo. El nido (construido por ambos padres) es una copa resistente con paredes gruesas y est hecha con ramas pequeas; hierbas y musgo. Est recubierto con raicillas finas y; a veces; con pelo de animal.
Chestnut-backed-Chickadee,Poecile rufescens,Chickadees and Titmice,Moist conifer forests; adjacent oaks; shade trees. In much of its range; a bird of dense; moist coniferous forest; with trees such as spruce; fir; tamarack; hemlock; and others. In southern part of range; lives in pine-oak woods and in redwood forest with understory of alders and willows; also in oak woods and in groves of willows along streams.,Forages mostly by hopping among twigs and branches and gleaning food from surface; often hanging upside down to reach underside of branches. Often probes in crevices in bark; and sometimes takes food while hovering. Readily comes to bird feeders for seeds or suet. May store food; recovering it later.,6-7; sometimes 5-9. White; with fine reddish brown dots concentrated at larger end; sometimes unmarked white. Incubation is probably by female; but details not well known. If disturbed; adult on nest flutters wings and makes loud hissing noise. Young: Probably cared for by both parents. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Mostly insects; seeds; berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including caterpillars; moths; beetles; leafhoppers; scale insects; small wasps; and others. Also eats spiders; seeds (especially of conifers); and berries. ,Nesting behavior is not well known. Members of pair may remain together all year. Nest site is in hole in tree; usually low; 2-20' above ground; can be much higher (reportedly up to 80"). Will nest in the same site more than one year. Uses natural cavity in dead or rotten wood; the chickadees often excavating or enlarging it themselves; also will nest in old woodpecker holes or in nest boxes. Nest has foundation of moss; lichens; feathers; bark fibers; plant down; lined with soft materials such as animal hair. 
Chestnut-collared-Longspur,Calcarius ornatus,Longspurs and Snow Buntings,Plains; prairies. Breeds in the general region of shortgrass prairie; but in areas of slightly longer grass and scattered taller weeds. Winters in shortgrass prairies and fields. Overlaps broadly in range with McCown's Longspur; but tends to occur in areas with taller and denser grass.,Forages while running and walking on ground; picking up items from soil or from plants. After flushing insects from ground; sometimes will chase them; even in short flights.,4-5; sometimes 3; rarely 6. Whitish; marked with brown; black; purple. Incubation is by female only; about 10-13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10 days after hatching; can fly well by a few days later. 2 broods per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. Seeds may make up close to half of summer diet of adults; and great majority of winter diet; included are seeds of weeds and grasses. Also feeds on many insects in summer; including grasshoppers; crickets; beetles; and others; as well as spiders. Young are fed mostly insects. ,To defend nesting territory; male performs flight-song display; fluttering up about 20'; flying in undulating circles while singing; then fluttering down again. Also often sings from a raised perch. Nest site is on ground; often at base of grass clump or weed; or next to dried cow manure or other object. Placed in shallow depression; either a natural hollow or one scraped out by bird; so that rim of nest is about level with ground. Female builds nest; a shallow cup of grass; lined with finer grass and sometimes with rootlets; feathers; or animal hair. 
Chestnut-sided-Warbler,Setophaga pensylvanica,Wood Warblers,Slashings; bushy pastures. Habitat specialist; expanding range since 19th century as forests were cut over in the eastern United States. Breeds in second-growth deciduous woods; overgrown fields; and edge habitat. Prefers brushy thickets; briers; and brambles. Winters in tropics in forest edge and second growth.,Forages by hopping actively among branches of shrubs and small trees; searching for insects among leaves and twigs; hovering momentarily to take items from foliage. Typically takes insects from undersides of leaves. Also darts out to catch flying insects in mid-air.,Usually 4; sometimes 3-5. Whitish with brown markings. Incubated 11-12 days by female. Cowbirds frequently lay eggs in nests of this species. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. During nesting season; known to eat caterpillars; flies; small moths; small grasshoppers; beetles; spiders; also a few berries. May eat slightly more berries in winter in the tropics; but insects still make up over 90% of diet then. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. During courtship; male displays to the female by fluffing his plumage; raising his yellow crown feathers; spreading and vibrating his wings and tail. Nest: Placed in low dense shrubs or tangles; such as blackberry or rhododendron; or in deciduous saplings; such as alder or maple. Loosely constructed open cup nest (built by the female) is made of cedar or grapevine bark strips; fibrous weeds; grasses; roots; and fine plant down; lined with fine grass and animal hair. Nest may be attached to twigs with spiderwebs. 
Chihuahuan-Raven,Corvus cryptoleucus,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Arid and semi-arid grassland; scrub; yucca flats. Mostly a bird of dry grasslands. Generally avoids both wooded areas and true deserts; but occurs in brushy country in the lowlands. In the southwest; Common Raven lives in both drier areas (extreme deserts of lowlands) and wetter areas (mountain forests) than the Chihuahuan Raven; but is seldom in the grasslands.,Mostly forages on ground; sometimes above ground in shrubs or cactus. Except during nesting season; usually forages in flocks. Often gathers at garbage dumps; and may patrol along highways looking for road kills.,5-6; sometimes 3-8. Pale olive to gray-green; blotched with brown and lavender. Incubation is thought to be by both parents; about 18-21 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest about a month after hatching.,Omnivorous. Diet is highly varied; but mostly animal matter; including large insects; spiders; earthworms; snails; rodents; lizards; and eggs and young of other birds. Often eats carrion and garbage. Also feeds on grain; seeds; berries; and fruits; including cactus fruit. ,Sometimes nests in loose colonies where good nesting sites are concentrated. In some areas; breeds mostly in summer; perhaps to take advantage of better food supply after summer rains begin. Nest site is in tree; shrub; or large yucca; or on utility pole; sometimes on buildings; towers; other artificial supports. Height varies; 5-40' above the ground. Nest (thought to be built by female) is a bulky mass of sticks and thorny twigs; lined with grass; bark fibers; animal hair. Sometimes works in debris such as rags; paper; barbed wire. 
Chimney-Swift,Chaetura pelagica,Swifts,Open sky; especially over cities and towns. Forages in the sky over any kind of terrain; wherever there are flying insects. Now most common over towns and cities; within its range; few forests remain with hollow trees large enough to serve as nest sites.,Forages only while flying; pursuing insects and scooping them out of the air. Often flies high but will forage very low during wet weather. Typically seen foraging in small flocks.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White. Incubation is by both parents; 19-21 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitating insects. Young may climb out of nest after about 20 days; creeping up vertical walls. Age of young at first flight about 28-30 days.,Flying insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; flies; true bugs; and moths; also spiders. Will concentrate at times on swarming insects; such as emergences of winged adult ants. ,Courtship involves aerial displays; in one display; two birds fly close together; one following the other; both gliding with wings held up in V. Breeding pair is often assisted by an extra adult "helper." Nest site is inside a chimney or similar hollow tower; usually well down from opening; in a well-shaded area. Originally nested (and sometimes still does) inside large hollow trees. Nest (built by both sexes) is shaped like half a saucer; made of twigs glued together with the birds' saliva. Adults break off short dead twigs while zooming past in flight. 
Chipping-Sparrow,Spizella passerina,New World Sparrows,Open woods; conifers; orchards; farms; towns. Original breeding habitat probably was mainly open pine woods; coniferous forest edges; savanna with scattered conifers. Still breeds in such areas but now also very common in suburbs; city parks; orchards; pastures; other altered habitats. Winters in open woods; thickets; farmland; brush.,Forages mostly on the ground; but also up in shrubs and low trees. Occasionally makes short flights to catch insects in mid-air. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,3-4; rarely 2-5. Pale blue-green; with markings of brown; purple; and black mostly at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 11-14 days; male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 8-12 days after hatching. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Diet varies with season. In summer; feeds mostly on insects; including grasshoppers; caterpillars; beetles; leafhoppers; true bugs; and many others; plus some spiders. Also eats many seeds; especially in fall and winter; including those of grasses; weeds; some waste grain. ,A few males have more than one mate. Nest site varies. Usually in a conifer; but can be in a deciduous tree or sometimes on the ground; usually lower than 15' above the ground; but can be up to 60' or even higher. Nest (built by female) is a compact open cup made of grass; weeds; rootlets; lined with fine grass and animal hair. At one time; when Americans were more rural; the Chipping Sparrow was well known for using horsehair in its nest lining. 
Chuck-wills-widow,Antrostomus carolinensis,Nightjars,Oak and pine woodlands. Breeds in shady southern woodlands of various types; including open pine forest; oak woodlands; edges of swamps. Winter habitats include subtropical woods and lowland rain forest in the tropics.,Forages at night; perhaps most actively at dusk and dawn and on moonlit nights. Forages by flying out from a perch high in a tree or from the ground to catch flying insects; also forages in continuous flight along the edges of woods. Captures food in its wide; gaping mouth; insects and small birds are swallowed whole.,2. Creamy white; usually blotches with brown and gray. Incubation is probably by female only; about 3 weeks. If the nest is disturbed; the adult may move the eggs some distance away. Young: Apparently cared for by female alone. Female broods young and shelters them during the day; feeds them by regurgitating insects. Age of young at first flight 17 days or more.,Mostly large insects. Feeds on large night-flying insects; especially beetles and moths; also many others. Also occasionally takes small birds; including warblers; sparrows; and hummingbirds. ,In courtship during daytime; male struts or sidles up to female with his body plumage puffed up; wings drooping; and tail spread; moves with jerky actions; and calls. Nest site is on ground; in rather open area within shady understory of forest. Same site may be used more than one year. No nest built; eggs laid on flat ground on leaves or pine needles. 
Chukar,Alectoris chukar,Pheasants and Grouse,Rocky; grassy; or brushy slopes; arid mountains; canyons. Successfully introduced mainly around rocky cliffs; steep canyon slopes where winter snow will melt quickly; grassland mixed with sagebrush or saltbush. Needs cover of grass; brush; introduced cheatgrass is key element. Often in very dry country; but may require access to water unless it can eat plenty of green leaves.,Feeds mostly on ground; but will climb into shrubs and trees for berries. Forages in flocks in winter.,8-14; sometimes 6-20 or even more. Pale yellow to buff; spotted with reddish-brown. Incubation typically by female only; 22-24 days. Perhaps sometimes female may lay two separate clutches of eggs; and male may incubate one while female incubates the other. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching. Tended by one parent (usually female) or by both; role of the male in raising young still not well understood. Young mostly find their own food. Able to fly at 7-10 days; reach full size in about 2 months.,Seeds; leaves; berries; insects. Diet varies with season. Many of major food plants are also introduced from Eurasia. Grasses provide much of food (seeds; leaves). In winter may feed mostly on seeds; such as cheatgrass and Russian thistle. Eats berries of Russian olive and other plants. Spring and summer diet includes many green leaves; insects. ,In courtship; male displays by tilting head; circling female. Both members of pair go through mock feeding movements; male may feed female. Nest site is on ground; usually hidden under shrub or overhanging rock. Nest is a depression with substantial lining of grass; twigs; feathers. 
Cinnamon-Teal,Spatula cyanoptera,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; fresh ponds. Favors fresh or alkaline shallow lakes; extensive marshes. Generally not in coastal salt marshes. In migration; may pause on any kind of small pond or reservoir. South American races may use wider variety of habitats.,Usually forages in shallow water; swimming forward with head partly submerged; straining food from water. One feeding bird may follow another; taking advantage of food stirred up by paddling actions of first bird. Occasionally feeds on land near water.,9-12; sometimes 4-16. Whitish to very pale buff. Incubation is by female only; 21-25 days. Young: female leads young to water after they hatch. Young find their own food; capable of flight 7 weeks after hatching. If danger threatens young; adult female may put on broken-wing act as a distraction display. Unlike most duck species; male may not abandon mate until near the time the eggs hatch; and sometimes is seen accompanying female and young brood.,Mainly seeds. Plant material in diet includes seeds of smartweeds; sedges; grasses; pondweeds; others. Also eats insects; snails; small crustaceans. In one study; migrants consumed mostly seeds and other plant material in fall; a higher proportion of animal matter (mainly insects) in spring. ,Several males may court one female; making ritualized mock feeding and preening movements. Short display flights may develop into pursuit flights; with males chasing female. Nest site usually close to water among good cover of sedges; weeds; salt grass; generally well concealed. Nest is a shallow depression with some dead grass and weeds added; lined with down. Female selects nest site and builds nest. 
Clapper-Rail,Rallus crepitans,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Salt marshes; rarely brackish; locally in mangroves in southeast. Along most of Atlantic and Gulf Coasts; strictly a bird of salt marsh; sometimes in adjacent brackish marsh. In Florida; also found in shallow mangrove swamps.,Forages by walking in shallow water or on mud; especially on falling tide or at low tide; picking up items from the ground or vegetation; sometimes probing in mud or water.,Usually 7-11; sometimes 5-12 or more. Pale yellow to olive-buff; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is by both sexes; 20-23 days. Young: Downy young may leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents probably feed young. Parents may brood young in a separate nest from the one in which the eggs hatched. Young can fly in about 9-10 weeks.,Includes crustaceans; insects; fish. Diet varies with locality; and includes a wide variety of small prey. Crustaceans often favored; especially crabs; also crayfish and others. Also eats many aquatic insects; small fish; mollusks; worms; frogs. Eats seeds at times. ,In courtship displays; male approaches female; points bill down; and swings head from side to side; also stands erect with neck stretched; bill open. Male may feed female. Nest site is in clump of grass or other vegetation in marsh; near the upper reaches of high tide; or on bank near water. Nest (built by both sexes; although male may do more) is well-built cup of grasses and sedges; lined with finer material; often with vegetation woven into a canopy over nest. Often a ramp of plant material leads from ground up to nest. 
Clarks-Grebe,Aechmophorus clarkii,Grebes,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Clarks-Nutcracker,Nucifraga columbiana,Crows; Magpies; Jays,High mountains; conifers near treeline. Generally breeds at high elevations in the mountains; in open or broken forest of pine; spruce; or Douglas-fir. May also breed in lower-elevation pine or pinyon-juniper woods when there is a good cone crop. Wanders to above treeline in summer; and may move to lower elevation woods in fall.,Forages on ground and in trees. Occasionally catches flying insects in the air; or digs insect larvae out of wood by pounding with bill. Will pry open pine cones to extract seeds. Harvests pine seeds in late summer and fall; carrying up to 90 at once in throat pouch to bury them in soil on exposed slopes; may store 30;000 or more seeds in one season. Has a remarkable ability to find these caches later; feeding on them through winter.,2-4; sometimes up to 6. Pale green; lightly spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by both parents; about 16-18 days. Incubating adult sits tightly on nest even when closely approached. Young: Both parents care for and feed young. Food for nestlings often consists of pine seeds stored the preceding autumn. Young leave the nest about 18-21 days after hatching.,Omnivorous. Much of diet is pine seeds; remainder of diet quite varied; including other seeds; nuts; berries; insects; snails; eggs and young of other birds; carrion. ,Breeding activity often begins in late winter; when territory is still snow-covered. Courtship may involve long flights; male following female. Nest site is in coniferous tree; usually away from trunk on horizontal limb; 8-40' above the ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is large and deep; has a platform of twigs and bark fibers supporting a cup of grass; bark strips; pine needles. 
Clay-colored-Sparrow,Spizella pallida,New World Sparrows,Scrub; brushy prairies; jack pines. Breeds in shrubby areas including stands of bushes on open prairies; edges of woodlands; young second growth; understory in jack pine woods. May overlap with similar sparrows; but generally in more open areas than Chipping Sparrow; heavier brush than Brewer's Sparrow. In migration and winter; found in brushy fields; thickets; dry scrub; desert grassland.,Forages mostly while hopping on the ground; occasionally up in shrubs. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks; sometimes mixed with other sparrows.,3-5; usually 4. Pale blue-green; with dark brown spots usually concentrated at larger end. Incubation is mostly by female; about 10-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 7-9 days after hatching; jumping to ground and then scrambling into cover; unable to fly for about another week. 1 brood per year; sometimes 2.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet is not known in detail; but feeds mostly on seeds at most times of year; especially those of weeds and grasses; also some leaf buds; catkins; berries. Also eats many insects; especially in summer; including caterpillars; grasshoppers; true bugs; ants; damselflies; and many others; as well as spiders. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Males sing in spring to establish and defend nesting territories. During the breeding season; adults often forage away from nesting area; unlike most songbirds which do all their foraging within the breeding territory. Nest site is usually very low; either on ground or in low shrubs; up to 5' high. In some areas; nests built early in season placed on ground; later ones higher. Local populations often specialize in nest sites; in one Manitoba study; almost all nests built in snowberry bushes; other common sites include rosebushes and clumps of grass. Nest (built by female) is open cup of grass; weeds; twigs; rootlets; lined with fine grass; rootlets; animal hair. 
Clay-colored-Thrush,Turdus grayi,Thrushes,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Cliff-Swallow,Petrochelidon pyrrhonota,Swallows,Open to semi-open land; farms; cliffs; river bluffs; lakes. Widespread in all kinds of semi-open country; especially near water; from prairies to desert rivers to clearings in northern forest. Breeds where it can find sheltered vertical cliffs or other surfaces for nesting and a supply of mud for building the nest; still unaccountably scarce or missing in some seemingly suitable areas.,Feeds mostly on the wing. Often forages in flocks; and may feed low over the water or very high over other terrain. In bad weather; may feed on ground.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White to pale pinkish; spotted with brown. Incubation is by both parents; 14-16 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest about 21-23 days after hatching.,Insects. Feeds mostly on a wide variety of flying insects; particularly beetles (including june beetles and adult weevils); true bugs; flies; winged ants; bees; and wasps. Also eats grasshoppers; mayflies; lacewings; and various other insects; plus some spiders. Occasionally eats berries. ,Typically nests in colonies; sometimes with hundreds of nests crowded close together. Nest site is usually on vertical surface with some overhead shelter. Natural sites were on cliffs; most sites today on sides of buildings; under bridges; in culverts; or similar places. Nest is made of dried mud and shaped like a gourd; with large chamber for nest; narrowing to small entrance on side. Both sexes help build nest; inside of nest sparsely lined with grass and feathers. May repair and reuse old nest; sometimes that of another species. 
Colima-Warbler,Leiothlypis crissalis,Wood Warblers,Oak-pine canyons. Breeds above 6000' in montane forests of pine; juniper; oak; and madrone; or in oak-maple-Arizona cypress habitats. Key plants in habitat used by nesting birds in Texas include Mexican pinyon; Grave's oak; gray oak; Texas madrone; beargrass;  mountain mahogany; silktassel; mountain sage; Chisos prickly-pear; and pinyon-ricegrass. Prefers canyons and slopes. In winter in Mexico; found in humid pine-oak habitat with brushy understory.,Moves rather deliberately while foraging; more like a vireo than like most active warblers. Typically; warblers in this genus do much probing of buds and flowers. In winter in Mexico; probably defends feeding territories; usually observed foraging alone or in pairs rather than in flocks.,Usually 4. Creamy with wreath of brown spots at larger end. Incubated by both parents; about 12 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; but males do less than females; spending more time in defending territory. Young leave the nest 11 days after hatching; are independent of parents by a few days later.,Mostly insects. Diet not known in detail; undoubtedly feeds mostly on insects. Wasp galls from oaks; spiders; crane flies; and other flies are among favorite foods early in the breeding season. Nestlings are fed many small green moth larvae. ,Males defend nesting territories by singing and calling; sometimes physically attack territorial intruders. Nest: Placed on ground among rocks on bank of dry wash or at edge of talus slope. Nest (built by both sexes) is well shaded and hidden in dead leaves beneath grass tufts; rocks; or tree roots. Open cup-shaped nest of loosely woven; coarse grass and cedar bark strips; dead leaves; roots; and mosses; often lined with animal hair. Pinyon-ricegrass is a favorite nest material. 
Common-Black-Hawk,Buteogallus anthracinus,Hawks and Eagles,Wooded streams. Almost always found near water. In United States; breeds in tall trees (especially cottonwoods) along streams with more or less permanent water flow and with relative lack of human disturbance. In tropics found in wider range of habitats; including lowland rain forest; mountain rivers; coastal mangrove swamps.,Hunts mostly by watching from low perch; then gliding down to catch prey in talons. Sometimes hunts actively along streams by moving from rock to rock at water's edge; and sometimes wades in shallow water; stirring up prey.,1-2; sometimes 3. White to greenish-white; blotched with brown and lavender. Incubation is by both parents; with female incubating at night and much of day. Young: Female remains at nest almost constantly for first 2 weeks after eggs hatch; and for much of time thereafter. Male hunts and brings food to nest; female feeds it to young. Young leave nest after about 6-7 weeks; move to nearby trees; can fly well at about 10 weeks; adults continue feeding them for a further 5-6 weeks.,Includes fish; frogs; lizards. Feeds on a wide variety of small creatures; but especially those found in water. In United States; eats mostly fish; frogs; tadpoles; and lizards; plus some small birds; snakes; rodents; insects. In tropics; diet may include many crayfish; crabs; large insects. B,In courtship; pairs soar and dive; calling; with long legs dangling. Near nest site; male may feed female. Nest: In United States; site is in tree in grove along stream; usually in cottonwood or sycamore. Site usually 30-90' above ground. Nest is bulky platform of sticks; lined with green leaves; male brings much material; female adds it to nest. 
Common-Crane,Grus grus,Cranes,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Common-Cuckoo,Cuculus canorus,Cuckoos; Roadrunners; Anis,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Common-Eider,Somateria mollissima,Ducks and Geese,Rocky coasts; shoals; in summer; also islands; tundra. Very close to coastlines at all seasons. For nesting favors islands or coasts with rocky shorelines; either barren or forested; or coastal lagoons in tundra regions. At other seasons on shallow oceanic waters; usually not far from shore. Rarely on fresh water.,Forages mainly underwater; also forages in shallow water by up-ending or by swimming with only head submerged. May feed by day or night; most often on falling tide or at low tide.,3-5; sometimes 1-8. Olive-green to olive-gray. Incubation by female only; 24-25 days; sometimes 23-30 days. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching and go to water. Female tends young; but young find all their own food. Several broods often join in group called "creche;" accompanied by several adult females. Age at first flight 65-75 days.,Mainly mollusks. Feeds especially on mussels and other bivalves; also some crabs and other crustaceans; echinoderms; aquatic insects; small fish. On breeding grounds eats more insects and some plant material. ,Several males may court one female. Displays of male mostly involve exaggerated movements of head; accompanied by low cooing calls; also rearing up out of water; flapping wings. Nest site on ground; usually somewhat sheltered by rocks or plants; close to water. Occasionally on cliff ledge. Often breeds in colonies; may be associated with Arctic Terns or other birds. Nest is a shallow depression lined with plant material and with large amounts of down. 
Common-Gallinule,Gallinula galeata,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Fresh marshes; reedy ponds. May be on still or slow-moving waters. Favors fresh marshes with some open water; ideally with some open ground and some dense cover along margins. Sometimes on more open ponds with only small amount of marsh cover. Found with American Coot in many places; but requires more marsh growth.,Forages while swimming; walking on land; or climbing through marsh vegetation. While swimming; may dip head underwater; or may up-end with tail up and head down; sometimes dives.,8-11; sometimes 5-13. Buff; irregularly spotted with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 19-22 days. Young: Can swim well shortly after hatching. Young fed by both parents; sometimes by older siblings from earlier broods; gradually learn to feed themselves; finding most of own food after about 3 weeks; though still fed sometimes by parents past 6 weeks. Young capable of flight at 40-50+ days. 1 or 2 broods per year; rarely 3.,Omnivorous. Major food items include leaves; stems; and seeds of various water plants; also fruits and berries of terrestrial plants. Also eats insects; spiders; earthworms; snails and other mollusks; tadpoles. Sometimes eats carrion; eggs of other birds. ,In courtship; male chases female on land; both stop; bow deeply; preen each other's feathers. Other displays involve lowering head and raising tail; exposing white patches under tail. Nest site is in marsh over shallow water; sometimes on ground or in shrub near water. Nest (built by both sexes) is solidly constructed platform (or wide; shallow cup) of cattails; bulrushes; reeds; often has a ramp of similar material leading down to water. Similar platforms built nearby; may be used for resting or brooding. 
Common-Goldeneye,Bucephala clangula,Ducks and Geese,Forested lakes; rivers; in winter; also salt bays; seacoasts. In breeding season requires large trees (for nesting cavities) close to clear; cold water; as around northern lakes; bogs; rivers. In winter mostly on shallow; protected bays and estuaries; also on rivers and lakes.,Forages mostly underwater; rarely by dabbling or up-ending in shallow water.,usually 8-11; sometimes 5-17. Olive-green to blue-green. Incubation is by female; usually 29-30 days. Female covers eggs with down when leaving nest. Young: leave nest 1-2 days after hatching; are led to water by female. Young are tended by female but feed themselves. Age at first flight 56-66 days.,Varies with season and habitat. Eats crustaceans including crayfish; crabs; shrimps; amphipods; and others; also mollusks (including blue mussel); small fishes; marine worms; frogs; leeches. Aquatic insects are main food in summer (when lakes with no fish may be preferred). Also eats some plant material; such as pondweeds; especially in fall. ,First breeds at age of 2 years; but 1-year-old females go prospecting for future nest sites in early summer. Pair formation occurs mostly in late winter. Several males may court one female. In courtship; displays of male include throwing head far back with bill pointed skyward while uttering shrill call; also ritualized head-pumping; and short flights with exaggerated takeoff and landing. Nest sites are in large tree cavities; 5-60' above ground; sometimes in abandoned buildings; will use nest boxes. Nest is depression in wood chips at bottom of cavity; lined with down. Where nest sites are scarce; females may lay eggs in each others' nests. 
Common-Grackle,Quiscalus quiscula,Blackbirds and Orioles,Farmland; towns; groves; streamsides. Common in many kinds of open or semi-open country. Often forages in farm fields; pastures; suburban lawns; cattle feedlots; marshes. Nests and roosts in places with dense trees (especially conifers) close to open areas; as in groves; woodland edges; parks.,Forages mostly by walking on ground or wading in very shallow water; also up in trees and shrubs. When not nesting; usually forages in flocks. Sometimes steals food from Robins or other birds. Has been seen killing an adult House Sparrow. Will come to feeders for various items. When eating dry bread crumbs; may soak them in water first.,4-5; sometimes 2-6. Pale blue; blotched with brown. Incubation is by female only; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; bringing them mostly insects. Young leave the nest about 16-20 days after hatching. 1 brood per year; sometimes 2.,Omnivorous. Feeds on insects; including beetle grubs; grasshoppers; caterpillars; many others; also spiders; millipedes; earthworms; and such diverse items as crayfish; minnows; frogs; lizards; eggs and young of other birds; and small rodents. Vegetable matter also important in diet; may be majority in winter; includes berries; seeds; waste grain; acorns. ,Typically nests in small colonies of 10-30 pairs; sometimes to 100 or more. In courtship; male fluffs out body feathers; partly spreads wings and tail; and gives short scraping song; also postures with bill pointing straight up. Nest site is often well hidden among branches of dense tree or shrubs near water; less than 20' above ground; sometimes much higher; or very low in marsh growth. Unusual sites include hole in tree or hollow stump; in lower part of active Osprey nest; or inside old building. Nest (built by female) is bulky open cup of weeds; grass; twigs; usually with some mud added; inside lined with fine grass. 
Common-Greenshank,Tringa nebularia,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Common-Ground-Dove,Columbina passerina,Pigeons and Doves,Farms; orchards; wood edges; roadsides. Mostly in semi-open habitats with low brush and grass. In the southeast; found mostly in brushy fields; understory of open pine woods; forest edges. In southwest; occurs in similar habitats including orchards; ranch yards; mesquite thickets along streams.,Forages mostly on the ground; walking about and picking up seeds. Often forages in pairs; sometimes in small flocks; may associate with Inca Doves where their habitats overlap. Will come to bird feeders for seeds; especially in the southeast.,2; sometimes 3. White. Incubation is by both parents; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents presumed to feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest after 11-12 days or more. 2-3 broods per year; sometimes 4.,Mostly seeds. Feeds on a wide variety of seeds; especially those of grasses and weeds; also waste grain in farm fields. Also eats small fruits and berries; and reportedly eats some insects. ,In courtship; male struts with stiff steps; chest puffed out and head bowed; while cooing. Several males may compete for attentions of one female. Members of mated pairs often perch very close together; and may preen each other's feathers. Nest site varies; may be on ground; or in shrubs or low trees up to 25' above ground; usually 3-12' up on horizontal fork of branch. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is flat; flimsy platform of sticks. 
Common-Loon,Gavia immer,Loons,Wooded lakes; tundra ponds; coastal waters. In summer mainly on lakes in coniferous forest zone; also beyond treeline onto open tundra. Chooses large lakes with ample room for takeoff and with good supply of small fish. In winter mainly on ocean; usually fairly shallow waters close to shore; also on large lakes and reservoirs that remain ice-free.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled mainly by feet. Before diving; may swim on surface with head forward and partly submerged to peer underwater. Small fish swallowed underwater; larger items brought to surface and eaten there.,2; rarely just 1. Olive; spotted with brown or black. Incubation by both sexes (female may do more); 24-31 days. Young:  Leave nest within 1 or 2 days after hatching; can dive and swim underwater at 2-3 days. Young are tended and fed by both parents; when small; sometimes ride on parents' backs. Capable of flight at about 10-11 weeks after hatching. One brood per year.,Mostly small fish. Includes fish up to about 10" long such as minnows; suckers; perch; gizzard shad; rock cod; killifish; many others. Also crustaceans; mollusks; aquatic insects; leeches; frogs. Sometimes aquatic plants such as pondweeds and algae. ,Apparently first breeds at age of 2 years. Nesting territory claimed by "yodeling" song; also by flying in circles over territory with loud calls. In courtship displays; pairs dip bills in water repeatedly; rear up to vertical posture with wings partly spread; race side by side across surface of water. Nest:  Built by both sexes. Site always very near water; on island or shore; partly hidden by surrounding vegetation. Nest; often re-used from year to year; is a mound of grasses; twigs; reeds. 
Common-Merganser,Mergus merganser,Ducks and Geese,Wooded lakes; rivers; in winter; rarely coastal bays. Mainly around fresh water at all seasons. Summer: on shallow but clear rivers and lakes in forested country; avoids dense marshes and muddy waters. Winter: on lakes; large rivers; occasionally on bays along coast.,forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled by its feet; stroking with both feet in unison. Finds most food by sight; may swim along surface; dipping head underwater repeatedly until prey is spotted; then diving in pursuit.,8-11; sometimes 6-13. Pale buff. Females often lay eggs in each others' nests. Incubation is by female only; 30-35 days. Young: May remain in nest a day or more after hatching; then they climb to cavity entrance and jump to ground. Female tends young birds for several weeks; but young feed themselves; they may survive even if abandoned quite early. Young are capable of flight about 65-70 days after hatching.,mostly fish. Eats a wide variety of fish; also will eat mussels; shrimp; salamanders; rarely plant material. Adult males may swallow fish more than 1 foot long. Young ducklings eat mostly aquatic insects. ,Courtship displays of male include swimming very rapidly in circles near female; suddenly stretching neck upward; pointing bill straight up; and giving soft call. Nest site is near water; usually in large tree cavity; also in crevices in rock; in holes under tree roots or undercut banks; or in nest boxes. Occasionally in buildings. Nest of wood chips or debris in cavity; plus lining of down. 
Common-Murre,Uria aalge,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; large bays; colonies on sea cliffs. Favors cool ocean waters; both offshore and rather near coast; generally over continental shelf. Unlike Thick-billed Murre; tends to avoid areas of pack ice. Nests on coasts and islands; on ledges of cliffs and on flat bare rock atop sea stacks.,Forages while swimming underwater. May dive to more than 150' below surface when foraging.,One. Very variable; usually whitish; tan; blue; or green; with markings of brown; reddish; black. Incubation is by both sexes; 28-37 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Young leaves nest at 15-25 days; before able to fly; flutters down to water; is cared for and fed by parents at sea for several more weeks. Young is probably capable of flight at about 50-70 days.,Mostly fish. Feeds on wide variety of fish; including herring; cod; capelin; sand lance; haddock; many others. Also eats various crustaceans; marine worms; squid. ,First breeds at age of 4-5 years. Nests in colonies. Displays by members of pair include pointing bill skyward; bowing deeply; clashing open bills together; preening each other's feathers. One (usually female) may return to nest site from sea with fish; present it ceremonially to mate. Nest site is on cliff ledge or on flat stony surface near water. Nests may be very close together; incubating birds well within touching distance. No nest built; egg laid on bare rock. 
Common-Myna,Acridotheres tristis,Starlings and Mynas,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Common-Nighthawk,Chordeiles minor,Nightjars,Open country in general; often seen in the air over cities and towns. Inhabits any kind of open or semi-open terrain; including clearings in forest; open pine woods; prairie country; farmland; suburbs and city centers.,Forages most actively near dusk and dawn; also during the day and at night; perhaps especially on moonlit nights. Forages mostly in flight; scooping up flying insects in its wide; gaping mouth. Will feed around bright lights at night; taking the insects attracted there. May rarely take insects from the ground.,2; rarely 1-3. Whitish to pale buff or gray; heavily spotted with brown. Incubation is mostly by female; about 19 days. Incubating bird may shift position during the day so that the sun is always at her back. Young: Both parents care for young; feeding them regurgitated insects. Age of young at first flight is about 21 days.,Insects. Feeds mainly on flying insects; including beetles; moths; grasshoppers; and many others. Will feed heavily on swarms of winged ants or termites. ,In male's courtship display flight; his wingbeats become even more stiff and choppy as he circles and hovers high in the air; calling repeatedly; then he goes into a steep dive; with a rushing or "booming" sound made by air passing through wing feathers at bottom of dive. Landing near female; he spreads his tail; rocks back and forth; and calls. Nest site is on ground or bare open soil; often in a sandy place; also on gravel roofs; sometimes on top of a stump or other raised object. No nest built; eggs laid on flat surface. 
Common-Pauraque,Nyctidromus albicollis,Nightjars,Woodlands; brush; river thickets. In Texas; most common in native woodland; dense thickets; and areas of tall brush; foraging along edges and over adjacent open fields. In American tropics; widespread in semi-open habitats; mainly in lowlands.,Seems to forage most actively at dusk and dawn; also on moonlit nights. Forages by perching on branch or on ground and flying out to catch passing insects; also sometimes forages in continuous flight along edges of woods. May sometimes pick up insects from the ground; has longer legs than most nightjars (still quite short) and can run with surprising speed for short distances.,2. Buff to pale pink; finely marked with reddish brown. Incubation is by both parents. Young: Cared for and fed by both parents. Adults feed young by regurgitation. If site is disturbed; adult may call to young with low; throaty calls; young respond by hopping along the ground toward parent.,Insects. Not known in detail; but feeds mostly on night-flying insects; especially beetles; also moths and probably many others. ,Males call at night; probably both to defend territory and to attract a mate. Courtship behavior may involve birds facing each other on the ground; bobbing their heads and fluttering. Nest site is on ground; usually in fairly open woods; often placed at the base of a shrub. No nest built; eggs laid on dead leaves lying on ground. 
Common-Poorwill,Phalaenoptilus nuttallii,Nightjars,Dry hills; open brush. Various kinds of open dry terrain at low elevation in the west; including rocky mesas with scattered shrubs; washes and hills in Sonoran desert; scrubby areas in dry open pine forest. May be found in open grassland; but usually only around rocky outcrops.,Forages mostly by sitting on the ground or on a low perch and making short flights upward to catch passing insects. Occasionally forages in longer; sustained flights. Does most foraging at dawn and dusk or on moonlit nights. Sometimes picks up insects (and possibly spiders) from ground.,2. White; sometimes with a few spots. Incubation is by both parents; 20-21 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitating insects. If nest site is disturbed; parents can move either the eggs or young to a new location. Downy young can move on their own by hopping or somersaulting across the ground. Age of young at first flight 20-23 days. May raise 2 broods per year.,Insects. Feeds mainly on night-flying insects; especially moths and beetles; also some grasshoppers; flies; and others. Insects up to one and a half inches long can be swallowed whole. ,Male calls at night in spring to defend territory and to attract a mate. Nest site is on ground; on bare open soil; rock; or gravel; sometimes on dead leaves or pine needles. Often shaded by a shrub or overhanging rock; and sometimes in secluded rock shelter. No nest built; although bird may make a slight scrape in soil. Same site may be used more than one year. 
Common-Raven,Corvus corax,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Boreal and mountain forests; coastal cliffs; tundra; desert. Can live in a very wide array of habitats; from tundra above the Arctic Circle to hot desert areas of the southwest. Often in heavily forested country; may also live on prairies if good nest sites (on cliffs) exist nearby.,Typically forages in pairs; the two birds sometimes cooperating to flush out prey. Searches for nests; to eat the eggs or young birds. An opportunist; taking advantage of temporary food sources. Does most feeding on the ground. Often feeds as a scavenger; searching for carrion or visiting garbage dumps. In northern Alaska (Pt. Barrow) in winter; seen feeding at dump under artificial lights.,4-6; sometimes 3-7. Greenish; blotched with olive or brown. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 18-21 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings; and female broods them while they are small. Young leave nest about 5-6 weeks after hatching.,Omnivorous. May feed on practically anything; but majority of diet apparently is animal matter. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; caterpillars; and others; also rodents; lizards; frogs; and eggs and young of other birds. Regularly eats carrion and garbage. ,In courtship display; male soars; swoops; and tumbles in mid-air. Pair may soar high together; when perched; they touch bills; preen each other's feathers. Nest site is usually on ledge of rock cliff; or high in tall tree (especially conifer). May use same site year after year; adding material on top of old nest. Both sexes help build. Nest is a bulky basket of large sticks and twigs; with deep depression in center lined with grass; bark strips; moss; animal hair. 
Common-Redpoll,Acanthis flammea,Finches,Birches; thickets; tundra scrub. In winter; weeds; brush. Breeds in shrubby habitats of the North; including clearings in birch or  spruce forest; thickets of willow; alder; or dwarf birch; bushy areas on tundra. Winters in various kinds of semi-open country; including woodland edges and brushy or weedy fields.,Forages very actively in trees; shrubs; weeds; and on the ground. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks. Has a pouch within throat where it can store some food for up to several hours; this helps the bird in bitterly cold weather; allowing it to feed rapidly in the open and then digest food over a long period while it rests in a sheltered spot.,4-5; rarely up to 7. Pale green to blue-green; with purplish to reddish brown spots often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 10-11 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Fed mostly by female; contribution by male varies. Young leave the nest about 12 days after hatching.,Mostly seeds; some insects. Diet for most of year is mostly seeds and other vegetable matter. Feeds on catkins; seeds; and buds of willows; alders; and birches; small conifer seeds; also seeds of many weeds and grasses. Also eats insects; mainly in summer. ,Males dominate females in winter flocks; but as breeding season approaches; females become dominant and may take the lead in courtship. Does not seem to defend much of a nesting territory; nests of different pairs may be close together. Nest: Usually very well hidden in dense low shrubs; within a few feet of the ground; sometimes in grass clumps or under brushpiles. Nest (probably built by female) is an open cup of fine twigs; grass; moss; lined with feathers (especially ptarmigan feathers); plant down; or animal hair. 
Common-Ringed-Plover,Charadrius hiaticula,Plovers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Common-Sandpiper,Actitis hypoleucos,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Common-Tern,Sterna hirundo,Gulls and Terns,Lakes; ocean; bays; beaches. Wide range of aquatic habitats in summer; both coastal and inland waters in low-lying; open country; where shallow waters for fishing are close to undisturbed flat islands or beaches for nesting. Winters mostly along coastlines in warm subtropical or tropical waters.,Forages mostly by flying over water; hovering; and plunging to catch prey below surface. Sometimes dips down to take items from surface of water; or pursues flying insects in the air. Occasionally steals food from other terns.,1-3. Variable; buff to pale blue or olive; marked with brown and black. Incubation is by both parents (female may do more); 21-25 days. Young: Leave nest after a few days but remain nearby; are fed by both parents. Age at first flight about 22-28 days; may remain with parents another 2 months or more. One brood per year; rarely two.,Mostly fish. Feeds on a wide variety of small fish; focussing on whatever types most easily available; sometimes concentrating on shrimp instead. Also eats other crustaceans; insects; marine worms; small squid; leeches; marine worms. ,Usually first breeds at age 3-4 years. Nests in colonies; sometimes in isolated pairs. In aerial courtship; groups and pairs perform high flights. Male may fly over colony carrying fish; female follows. On ground; pair postures; bows; struts in circles; male presents fish to female. Nest site is on bare ground or surrounded by low vegetation; sometimes on floating mat of dead vegetation. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow scrape in soil; usually lined with bits of plant material and debris. 
Common-Yellowthroat,Geothlypis trichas,Wood Warblers,Swamps; marshes; wet thickets; edges. Breeds most abundantly in marshes and other very wet habitats with dense low growth. Also nests in briars; moist brushy places; tangles of rank weeds and shrubbery along streams; and overgrown fields; but is generally scarce in drier places. In migration and winter; still most common in marshes; but also occurs in any kind of brushy or wooded area.,Forages in marsh and among other dense low growth; searching for insects on surface of plants; sometimes hovering briefly to take insects from foliage. Occasionally makes short flights to catch insects in mid-air; and sometimes forages on ground.,Usually 3-5; sometimes 6. Creamy white with brown and black spots. Incubation is by female only; 12 days. The male feeds the female on the nest during incubation. Very commonly parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave the nest after 8-10 days. Normally 2 broods per year. Young are dependent on parents for a considerable period; longer than most other warblers.,Mostly insects. Feeds mainly on insects; including small grasshoppers; dragonflies; damselflies; mayflies; beetles; grubs; cankerworms and other caterpillars; moths; flies; ants; aphids; leafhoppers; and others; also eats spiders; and a few seeds. ,Male displays to female during courtship by flicking wings and tail; following her closely; and performing a flight display: flying up to 25-100' in the air and returning to another low perch; calling and singing. Nest: Prefers to nest low (less than 3' up) on tussocks of briars; weeds; grasses; or shrubs; and among cattails; bulrushes; sedges in marshes. Bulky open cup built by female; sometimes with a partial roof of material loosely attached to the rim. Made of weeds; grass stems; sedges; dead leaves; bark; and ferns; lined with fine grass; bark fibers; and hair. 
Connecticut-Warbler,Oporornis agilis,Wood Warblers,Poplar bluffs; muskeg; mixed woods near water; in migration; undergrowth. In breeding season; in United States and eastern Canada; prefers bogs with black spruce or tamarack. In western Canada nests on dry ridges; and in open poplar or aspen stands. In migration; found in undergrowth of lowland woods or in dense thickets in meadows.,Forages mainly by walking on the ground; seeking insects among the leaf litter; sometimes flipping over dead leaves. Also walks along branches; picking prey from crevices in bark. In migration; may forage in small flocks with others of its kind.,Usually 4-5. Creamy white; with black; brown; or lilac spots. Incubation period and roles of the parents are not well known. Apparently only rarely parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Both parents apparently care for young; age at which they leave the nest is not well known.,Mostly insects. Details of diet not well studied. Undoubtedly feeds mostly on insects; like other warblers. Reported to feed its young on green caterpillars; also seen eating spiders; snails; may sometimes eat seeds and raspberries. ,Males sing from trees to defend nesting territory. Nest: Hidden in sphagnum moss hummock. In poplar woods; placed next to bunch of dry grass or weeds. Nest is an open cup; constructed of leaves; grass; and bark strips; or sometimes a simple hollow in moss lined with finer stems of grass. 
Cooks-Petrel,Pterodroma cookii,Shearwaters and Petrels,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Coopers-Hawk,Accipiter cooperii,Hawks and Eagles,Mature forest; open woodlands; wood edges; river groves. Nests in coniferous; deciduous; and mixed woods; typically those with tall trees and with openings or edge habitat nearby. Also found among trees along rivers through open country; and increasingly in suburbs and cities where some tall trees exist for nest sites. In winter may be in fairly open country; especially in west.,Usually hunts by stealth; moving from perch to perch in dense cover; listening and watching; then putting on a burst of speed to overtake prey. Sometimes cruises low over ground; approaching from behind shrubbery to take prey by surprise.,3-5; sometimes 1-7. Pale bluish-white. Incubation is mostly by female; usually 34-36 days. Male brings food to female; and then incubates for a few minutes while female is eating. Young: Female broods young during first 2 weeks after they hatch; male brings food; gives it to female at perch near nest; and she feeds it to young. Young may climb about in nest tree after about 4 weeks; can fly at about 4-5 weeks.,Mostly birds and small mammals. Feeds mainly on medium-sized birds; in the size range of robins; jays; flickers; also on larger and smaller birds. Also eats many small mammals; such as chipmunks; tree squirrels; ground squirrels; mice; bats. Sometimes eats reptiles; insects. ,In courtship (and occasionally at other times); both sexes may fly over territory with slow; exaggerated wingbeats. Male feeds female for up to a month before she begins laying eggs. Nest site is in tree; either deciduous or coniferous; usually 25-50' above ground. Often placed on top of some pre-existing foundation; such as old nest of large bird or squirrel; or clump of mistletoe. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is bulky structure of sticks; lined with softer material such as strips of bark. 
Cordilleran-Flycatcher,Empidonax occidentalis,Tyrant Flycatchers,Moist woods; forests; shady canyons. Breeds in forested regions; mostly in the mountains; and mostly in deciduous growth along streams through mixed or coniferous forest. Often forages in conifers such as pines or Douglas-firs; but not common in purely coniferous forest. May tend to be in slightly drier or more open forest than Pacific-slope Flycatcher.,Forages by watching from a perch and then flying out to catch insects in the air. Also takes some food from foliage or twigs while hovering. Often forages quite high among the branches of tall conifers; but will also feed low; especially among streamside trees.,3-4; rarely 5. Whitish; with brown blotches concentrated near larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 14-15 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight probably about 14-18 days.,Mostly insects. Differences in diet between this bird and Pacific-slope Flycatcher poorly known. For the two species combined; diet is mostly insects; including small wasps; bees; flies; caterpillars; moths; beetles; and others. Also eats spiders; and a few berries and seeds. ,Differences in nesting (if any) between this species and Pacific-slope Flycatcher are poorly known. Nest site is sometimes in the fork of a small tree; but usually in other situations: in a cleft of a vertical streambank; on a stump; among the upturned roots of a fallen tree; under a small bridge; or on rafters in a shed. Natural sites are usually near (or on) the ground; but on artificial structures the nest may be more than 10' up. Nest (built by female) is cup of moss; grass; rootlets; strips of bark; lichens; and leaves; lined with finer material such as plant fibers; hair; feathers. 
Corys-Shearwater,Calonectris diomedea,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Favors relatively warm waters; warmer than those sought by Greater Shearwater. May occur farther north off North American coast in warm-water years. At least off southern New England; may be seen from shore more often than other shearwaters. Occurs both over continental shelf and far out to sea. Nests on islands; often rocky or mountainous.,Forages mainly by plunging into water from just above surface; and by seizing items while swimming. Often may feed at night. Scavenges near fishing boats; may feed in association with whales or large predatory fish; which drive schools of small fish to the surface.,One. White. Incubation is by both sexes; 52-56 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; visiting at night. Eventually young is deserted and goes to sea on its own. Period from hatching to departure probably about 90 days.,Mostly fish; squid; and crustaceans. Diet not well known; fish eaten include herring and sand lance. At times may feed mainly on squid. Also eats crabs and other crustaceans; and on scraps and offal around fishing boats. ,Breeds in colonies on islands; on large islands; colonies may be several miles inland. Breeding season mostly from March to October. Activity in colonies mainly late afternoon to dawn; where persecuted by humans or other predators; may visit colonies only at night. In courtship; members of pair sit close together on ground; nibbling at each other's head and bill. Nest:  Site is in burrow up to 3' long; or in crevice in rocks; sometimes on ground under thick scrub. Nest is simple pile of pebbles; shells. 
Costas-Hummingbird,Calypte costae,Hummingbirds,Deserts; washes; sage scrub. Mostly in dry and open habitats having a good variety of plant life; such as washes and streamsides in Sonoran desert; lower parts of dry canyons; coastal sage scrub. Rarely moves up into mountain meadows after breeding season.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill into the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and capture them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; 15-18 days. Young: Female feeds the young. Age of young at first flight about 20-23 days.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Often visits desert natives such as agave; chuparosa; desert honeysuckle; and fairy-duster. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,In courtship display; male flies high; then zooms down past perched female and climbs again; making shrill high-pitched whistle during the dive; also gives the same whistled song while perched. One male may mate with several females. Nest site is in rather open or sparsely leaved shrub or small tree; sometimes in yucca or cactus; usually 2-8 feet above the ground. Placed on horizontal or diagonal branch. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of plant fibers; bits of leaves or flowers; spider webs; usually has a grayish look. Female continues to add to nest during incubation period. 
Couchs-Kingbird,Tyrannus couchii,Tyrant Flycatchers,River groves; scattered trees. In southern Texas; found mainly in native woodland near rivers; also in dense brushland or chaparral; especially near water. May also occur around larger trees in towns. In Mexico; found in semi-open country; roadsides; forest edges.,Forages mostly by watching from a perch; then flying out to capture insects; returning to perch to eat them. Many insects are caught in mid-air; also hovers briefly while taking them from foliage; and may swoop down to take insects from just above (or on) the ground.,3-4; sometimes 5. Pinkish to warm buff; blotched with brown and lavender. Details of incubation not well known; but probably by female; a little over 2 weeks. Young: Probably both parents feed young. Age of young at first flight not well known; probably between 2 and 3 weeks.,Mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; but apparently feeds mostly on insects; including large ones such as beetles; grasshoppers; wasps; and large flies. Also eats some berries and small fruits. ,Nesting behavior is not well known; probably similar to that of Tropical Kingbird. Adults are aggressive in chasing larger birds away from the vicinity of the nest. Nest site is usually on horizontal limb of tree; 8-25' above the ground. Nest (probably built by female) is a bulky flat cup of twigs; leaves; Spanish moss; weeds; and strips of bark; lined with fine materials such as plant down; rootlets; and softer parts of Spanish moss. 
Craveris-Murrelet,Synthliboramphus craveri,Auks; Murres; Puffins,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Crescent-chested-Warbler,Oreothlypis superciliosa,Wood Warblers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Crested-Auklet,Aethia cristatella,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Open sea; nests in colonies on sea cliffs. Often over deep water far from land; but may forage near shore where there is turbulence caused by upwellings; tide rips; or tidal flow in passes between islands. Nests on rocky islands among boulders; talus slopes; lava flows; cliffs with many openings and crevices.,Forages while swimming below the surface. Underwater behavior poorly known; but maximum dive depth thought to be about 100' below surface. Often forages in flocks.,one. White; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; 29-40 days; usually about 34. Young: Both parents feed young (although female may do more); bringing back food in throat pouch. Young is noisy; making peeping sounds when parents present and whistling when they are absent. Age at first flight 27-36 days; young comes out of nest for a few days before to exercise wings.,Mostly small crustaceans. Diet not well known; but includes many small crustaceans that occur in swarms (especially euphausiid shrimp and copepods); also probably small numbers of fish and squid. ,First breeds at age of 3 years or older. In courtship; male puffs out chest; points bill up; and makes honking sounds; female approaches; and pair engages in bill-touching; preening each other's neck feathers; intertwining necks. Nest site is in deep crevice in cliff or among boulders; may be several feet below surface of rock pile. Nest is shallow depression in soil or pebbles at bottom of crevice. 
Crested-Caracara,Caracara cheriway,Falcons,Prairies; rangeland. Lives in a wide variety of semi-open habitats offering open ground for hunting and dense cover for nesting. In our area these include wet prairies of Florida; Texas coastal plain; desert in Arizona. Found in other kinds of open terrain in American tropics.,An opportunist; hunting and scavenging in a variety of ways. Often hunts by flying low; taking small animals by surprise. Flies along highways early in morning; searching for road kills. May steal food from other birds. May scratch on the ground for insects; or dig up turtle eggs.,2-3; rarely 4. Pale brown; blotched with darker brown. Incubation is reportedly by both sexes (although female may do more); about 30 days. Young: Both parents bring food to young in nest. Age of young at first flight varies; probably usually 6-8 weeks. Young may remain with parents for several weeks after fledging.,Carrion; small animals. Feeds on a wide variety of smaller creatures; either captured alive or found dead. Diet includes rabbits; ground squirrels; skunks; various birds (plus their eggs and young); frogs; snakes; lizards; turtles; young alligators; fish; large insects. ,In courtship; two birds may toss heads back repeatedly while giving guttural call. Members of a pair may preen each other's feathers. Nest sites vary; usually 8-50' above ground in top of shrub or tree; such as live oak; cabbage palm; acacia; in Arizona; sometimes in giant cactus. Nest is a bulky structure of sticks; weeds; debris; sometimes built on top of old nest of other species. Nest may be reused annually; with more material added each year. 
Crested-Myna,Acridotheres cristatellus,Starlings and Mynas,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Crimson-collared-Grosbeak,Rhodothraupis celaeno,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Crissal-Thrasher,Toxostoma crissale,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Dense brush along desert streams; mesquite thickets. Habitat varies; in Sonoran desert found only in the densest mesquite thickets along washes; but in Chihuahuan desert it lives in sparse brush in open areas. Also occurs in dense chaparral; among manzanita and other scrub; in the southwestern mountains.,Forages almost entirely on the ground under dense brush; finds much of its food by digging in the soil or among debris with its heavy; curved bill. Perches in bushes to eat berries.,2-3; sometimes 4. Blue-green; unmarked; unlike those of other thrashers. Incubation is by both parents; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 11-13 days after hatching; are unable to fly well for several more days. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects; some berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; grasshoppers; ants; caterpillars; and many others; also spiders; centipedes; and other arthropods. Sometimes eats small lizards. Berries and small fruits make up an important minority of diet. ,Pairs may remain together on territory at all seasons. Males sing in spring to defend nesting territory. When cowbirds lay eggs in the nest of this species; the adult thrashers generally throw the cowbird eggs out of the nest immediately. Nest site is well concealed in dense low growth; often in mesquites but also in other shrubs such as willows; greasewood; saltbush; even exotic saltcedar; usually 2-8' above the ground. Nest (built by both parents) is a bulky open cup of thorny twigs; lined with softer materials such as fine grass; weeds; bark fibers; and sometimes feathers. 
Cuban-Pewee,Contopus caribaeus,Tyrant Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Curlew-Sandpiper,Calidris ferruginea,Sandpipers,Tidal flats; beaches; wet tundra in summer. In migration; found in places where other small sandpipers congregate; including mudflats and beaches along coast; muddy edges of ponds and lakes. Nesting habitat in Alaska is along low ridges and slight rises in wet; grassy tundra.,Forages mostly in shallow water; probing in mud with bill; sometimes picking items from surface. When feeding with Dunlins; Curlew Sandpiper often wades in slight deeper water; and tends to eat larger items.,Usually 4. Creamy to pale olive; blotched with brown and reddish-brown. Incubation is apparently by female only; roughly 21 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Young are tended by female; but feed themselves. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Insects; crustaceans; mollusks; worms. Diet in New World not well known. In Old world; eats wide variety of insects (especially flies and beetles); mainly in breeding season; also crustaceans (including amphipods and shrimp); small mollusks; marine worms; a few seeds. ,Male proclaims territory by calling from raised mound; performing low flight display. Courtship displays are more complex than those of most small sandpipers. Male often pursues female in air; both birds perform ritualized nest-making movements; male runs around female in zigzag pattern; with wings raised; tail spread; white rump patch displayed prominently. After elaborate courtship; male apparently departs; leaving female to care for eggs and young. Nest site is on ground on hummock or low mound on tundra. Nest is shallow depression; lined with bits of moss; lichens; leaves. 
Curve-billed-Thrasher,Toxostoma curvirostre,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Deserts; arid brush. Lives in Sonoran desert (with its varied vegetation) or in dry brushy country; mainly in lowlands. Avoids extreme desert situations with sparse plant life. Often in suburban neighborhoods; especially where cholla cactus grows. In southern Texas; lives in chaparral with prickly-pear cactus. Sometimes on open grassland around stands of cholla.,Forages mostly on the ground; using its heavy curved bill to dig in the soil; to flip leaf-litter aside; and to turn over small rocks and other items. When digging in hard dirt; braces its tail against the ground and pounds straight downward with heavy blows of bill.,3; sometimes 2-4. Pale blue-green with tiny brown dots. Incubation is by both parents during the day; apparently only by female at night; incubation period 12-15 days. Young: Both parents feed young. If nest is in situation exposed to sun; female may spend much time shading the nestlings. Young leave nest about 14-18 days after hatching. 2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects and their larvae; including beetles; ants; grasshoppers; wasps; and many others; also spiders; centipedes; snails; and sowbugs. Also eats many berries; and feeds heavily on the fruits and seeds of cactus; including those of prickly-pear and saguaro. ,Pair may remain together all year on permanent territory. Especially in spring; male defends territory by singing. In courtship; male may follow female; giving a soft song. Nest: Most commonly placed in fork of cholla cactus; 3-5' above the ground. Sometimes in yucca; prickly-pear; or thorny shrub; or on top of mistletoe clump in shrub or low tree. May build on top of old Cactus Wren nest. May sometimes reuse same nest sites. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is bulky; loose cup of thorny twigs; lined with fine grasses; rootlets; feathers; animal hair. 
Dark-eyed-Junco,Junco hyemalis,New World Sparrows,Conifer and mixed woods. In winter; open woods; undergrowth; roadsides; brush. Over its wide range; breeding habitat is consistently coniferous or mixed woodland; usually in rather open situations such as edges or clearings. Winters in many kinds of semi-open habitats including woodland edges; thickets; brushy places; suburban areas.,Forages mostly while hopping and running on the ground. Sometimes scratches with its feet in leaf-litter or snow. Will come to bird feeders; but tends to forage on the ground under the feeding tray.,3-5; rarely 6. Whitish to bluish white or pale gray; with markings of brown and gray often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 11-13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest 9-13 days after hatching. 1-2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Mostly seeds and insects. Close to half of summer diet of adults consists of insects; including caterpillars; beetles; grasshoppers; true bugs; and others; also spiders. Feeds heavily on seeds of weeds and grasses; especially in winter. Also eats some berries. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male sings from high perch to defend nesting territory. In courtship; both members of pair may hop about on ground with wings drooped and with tail spread widely to show off white outer tail feathers; male may give soft song. Nest site is almost always on ground; well hidden under overhanging grass; under log; rock; or exposed roots; or in shallow hole in dirt bank. Sometimes up in shrub; tree; or ledge of building; rarely more than 10' above ground. Nest (built mostly by female) is an open cup of grass; weeds; leaves; lined with fine grass and sometimes with hair or feathers. 
Dickcissel,Spiza americana,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Alfalfa and other fields; meadows; prairies. Originally nested in native prairies and meadows. Today; many nest in fields of alfalfa; clover; timothy; or other crops. In migration; may be found in any kind of grassy or weedy fields.,Forages mostly on the ground and in low vegetation. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 2-6. Pale blue; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 12-13 days. Young: Nestlings are fed by female only. Young leave the nest about 7-10 days after hatching; are unable to fly for several more days.,Mostly insects and seeds. Insects make up majority of diet in early summer; included are many grasshoppers; also crickets; caterpillars; beetles; and many others. At other seasons; may feed mainly on seeds; including those of weeds and grasses; also cultivated grain. ,In many areas; numbers of nesting Dickcissels are wildly variable from year to year. Males arrive on breeding grounds about a week before females; and sing to defend nesting territory. One male may have more than one mate. Nest site is usually on or near the ground; typically well concealed in dense growth of grass; weeds; alfalfa; clover; or other plants. Sometimes placed in shrub or low tree; up to 6' above ground; exceptionally higher. Nest (built by female) is a bulky open cup made of weeds; grass; leaves; lined with fine grass; rootlets; sometimes animal hair. 
Double-crested-Cormorant,Phalacrocorax auritus,Cormorants,Coasts; bays; lakes; rivers. Very adaptable; may be found in almost any aquatic habitat; from rocky northern coasts to mangrove swamps to large reservoirs to small inland ponds. Nests in trees near or over water; on sea cliffs; or on ground on islands.,Forages mostly by diving from surface and swimming underwater; propelled by feet (may sometimes use wings as well). May forage singly or in groups. May forage in clear or muddy water; at mid to upper levels of water more often than near bottom.,3-4; sometimes 1-7. Bluish white; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; 25-33 days; typically 28-30. Young:  both parents feed the nestlings. After 3-4 weeks; young may leave ground nests and wander through colony; but return to nest to be fed. Usually first fly at about 5-6 weeks; probably independent at 9-10 weeks.,Fish and other aquatic life. Diet varies with season and place; includes very wide variety of fish; also crabs; shrimp; crayfish; frogs; salamanders; eels; sometimes snakes; mollusks; plant material. ,Usually first breeds at age of 3 years. Nests in colonies; sometimes mixed with wading birds and others. Male displays to female on water by splashing with wings; swimming in zigzags; diving and bringing up pieces of weeds. At nest site; male displays by crouching and vibrating wings while calling. Nest:  Site is near water on cliff ledge; on ground on island; or at any height in tree. Nest (built mostly by female; with materials brought by male) platform of sticks and debris; lined with finer materials. 
Dovekie,Alle alle,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Oceanic; offshore to pelagic. Usually in cold Arctic waters; often around edges of pack ice; may rest on ice. Even when moving farther south in winter; favors cold waters; avoiding warm currents. Often very far from land over deep water. Nests on northern coasts and islands on deeply fissured cliffs; talus slopes; boulder piles.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; evidently using both wings and feet. Does most foraging just below surface.,One. Pale blue-green; sometimes with buff and brown spots. Incubation is by both sexes; 28-31 days. Young: Both parents feed nestling; bringing back food in throat pouch; young is brooded continuously for first 2-4 days after hatching. Young leaves nest 23-30 days after hatching; usually departing in evening or at night; flying out to sea; alone or accompanied by adults.,Small crustaceans. Feeds almost entirely on small crustaceans; mainly very small species that occur in swarms near surface in cold waters; including calanoid copepods; mysids; amphipods; euphausiids; others. Also eats small numbers of fish; mollusks; marine worms; plus bits of algae. ,Breeds in colonies; northernmost colonies may be very large. On arrival at colony in spring; flocks may circle over site for hours; giving trilled calls. Members of pair display by bowing rapidly and repeatedly; wagging head from side to side; touching bills. Nest site is well hidden among rocks or in crevice in cliff; same pair may use site in subsequent years. Nest is thin layer of pebbles; sometimes with bits of grass or lichen. 
Downy-Woodpecker,Dryobates pubescens,Woodpeckers,Forests; woodlots; willows; river groves; orchards; shade trees. Found in wide variety of habitats; from wilderness areas to second-growth woods to suburban yards; but generally favors deciduous trees. In far north and in mountains (areas dominated by conifers); restricted to groves of deciduous trees such as aspens or willows.,Can forage not only on trunks and major limbs of trees but also on minor branches and twigs (often climbing about acrobatically and hanging upside down); as well as on shrubs and weed stalks. Male and female forage differently at times; but this varies with place and season. Feeding on trees; does more tapping and excavating in winter; more gleaning from surface in summer.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White. Incubation is by both sexes; about 12 days. Young: Both parents bring billfuls of insects to feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 20-25 days after hatching; may follow parents around for a few weeks thereafter. 1 brood per year; possibly 2 in south.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a variety of insects; especially beetles and ants; also gall wasps; caterpillars; others. Also eats seeds and berries. Will eat suet at bird feeders. ,Male and female have separate feeding areas in fall and early winter; with pairs forming by late winter. Male and female take turns drumming loudly on dead limbs on their separate territories; male gradually approaches. Nest site is cavity (excavated by both sexes) in dead limb or dead tree; usually 12-30' above ground; sometimes 5-60'. Cavity entrance is often surrounded by fungus or lichen; helping to camouflage site. 
Dunlin,Calidris alpina,Sandpipers,Tidal flats; beaches; muddy pools; wet tundra in summer. During migration and winter; widespread in coastal habitats; mainly mudflats; but also sand beaches; rocky shores. Inland; occurs on lake shores; sewage ponds; flooded fields. Breeds on wet tundra; especially areas with hummocks; tussocks; and low ridges interspersed with ponds and marshy spots.,Forages by picking at items on surface or by probing in mud; sometimes with very rapid "stitching" motion; probing several times per second. May feed by day or night.,4; sometimes 2-3; perhaps very rarely more than 4. Olive or blue-green to buff; with brown blotches concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by both sexes (mostly female during night; male during day); 20-24 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young at first; but female often departs after a few days. Young feed themselves; are able to fly at age of 19-21 days.,Mostly insects on tundra; other small invertebrates on coast. Diet varies with season and location. On breeding grounds feeds heavily on insects; including midges; crane flies; beetles; and others. On coast eats wide variety of small creatures found in intertidal zone; including marine worms; snails and other mollusks; amphipods and other crustaceans; sometimes small fish. Sometimes eats seeds and leaves. ,In display flight; male circles slowly over breeding territory; fluttering and gliding; while singing. On ground; reacts to intruding males by advancing; pausing to raise one wing high over back. Courtship may involve ritualized nest-making movements. Nest site is on ground; usually well hidden in or under grass clump or in hummock. Nest is a shallow scrape; lined with leaves and grass. Both sexes make scrapes; but female chooses one and completes nest. 
Dusky-Flycatcher,Empidonax oberholseri,Tyrant Flycatchers,Breeds in mountain chaparral (Canadian-zone brush) with scattering of trees. Favored habitat includes both trees and low bushes: varies from open conifer forest with understory of deciduous shrubs; to brushy slopes with a few taller trees. In migration; often in foothills. Winters in streamside woods in southwest; or in a variety of semi-open habitats in Mexico.,Forages by watching from an exposed perch (often on a dead branch); then flying out to capture insects; usually in the air. Sometimes drops to ground or hovers next to foliage or bark to capture insects there.,4; sometimes 2-3; rarely 5. Smaller clutches may be laid on second attempts after first nesting fails. Eggs dull white; rarely dotted with brown. Incubation is by female only; usually 15-16 days. Young: Brooded by female; and fed by both parents. Young leave the nest about 15-20 days after hatching; may be fed by parents for another 3 weeks. 1 brood per year.,Insects. Diet not known in detail; but so far as known feeds entirely on insects; including moths; bees; wasps; grasshoppers; damselflies; caterpillars; butterflies; and undoubtedly others; probably all of rather small size. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing from prominent perch; occasionally performs short flight-song display. In courtship; both sexes hop about in branches; fluttering wings. Nest site is usually in deciduous shrub; less often in conifer; usually 3-6' above ground; rarely up to 16'. Placed in vertical fork among dense foliage. Nest (probably built by female only) is cup of grasses; weeds; shreds of bark; lined with plant down; feathers; animal hair; and other soft materials. 
Dusky-Grouse,Dendragapus obscurus,Pheasants and Grouse,Deciduous and mixed forests in mountains in summer; conifer forests at higher elevations in winter. Prime summer habitat is where forest meets open country; such as sagebrush flats. In winter; these birds favor dense forests of conifers.,Forages mostly on ground in summer; mostly in trees in winter; especially in areas with heavy snow cover.,5-10; sometimes 2-12. Pale buff; usually speckled with brown. Incubation is by female only; 25-28 days. Young: Usually leave nest within a day after hatching; and follow female; young find all their own food. Female often fearless in defense of eggs or young; standing her ground when approached closely. Young can make short flights at age of 8-9 days; are full-grown at about 13 weeks.,Conifer needles; leaves; insects. Diet in summer is mostly leaves; flowers; buds; berries; and conifer needles; also many insects. Very young birds may eat more insects than adults. In winter feeds mostly on needles of conifers; including pines; hemlocks; firs; douglas-firs. ,In breeding season; male gives deep song punctuated with short flights; wings fluttering loudly. In peak display; male struts on the ground with tail raised and fanned; neck feathers spread to reveal patches of bright skin. Female mates with male; then departs. Nest site is on ground; under cover such as shrub; log; rock ledge. Nest a shallow scrape; lined with dead twigs; needles; leaves; a few feathers. 
Dusky-Warbler,Phylloscopus fuscatus,Leaf-Warblers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Dusky-capped-Flycatcher,Myiarchus tuberculifer,Tyrant Flycatchers,Oak slopes; pine-oak canyons; junipers. In United States; usually found around tall oaks or pine-oak woods in the mountains. Also found along streams at middle elevations among tall cottonwoods and sycamores. In the tropics; inhabits many types of forest.,Forages mostly within the foliage of tall trees. Flies out from a perch; hovers for a moment while taking an insect from the leaves or twigs; then lands on another perch to eat it. Sometimes catches insects in mid-air.,4-5. Creamy white; finely but distinctly marked with brown; lavender; and olive gray. Details of incubation not well known; lasts about 2 weeks. Young: Probably both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight not well known; probably about 2 weeks.,Mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; but includes many small insects such as various flies; moths; caterpillars; beetles; treehoppers; wasps; and bees. Also eats some small fruits and berries. ,Nesting behavior is not well known. Male defends nesting territory in spring with conspicuous calls and song. Nest site is in hole in tree (often oak or sycamore); either a natural cavity or an old woodpecker hole. Height varies; 10-60' above the ground; but usually fairly high. Nest built inside cavity is a bulky mass of weeds; grass; twigs; strips of bark; plant fibers; leaves; and feathers; with a lining of softer material such as animal hair or plant down. 
Dusky-headed-Parakeet,Aratinga weddellii,African and New World Parrots,Wooded habitats in the western Amazon Basin. It prefers semi-open habitats such as vrzea ("flooded forests" in Portuguese; a low-lying; seasonally flooded region of the central Amazon); forest edges and forest remnants in open savannahs. It has also been found in coffee plantations.,NA,NA,NA,Typically in a tree or in arboreal termite nests with no additional nesting material. Female incubates two to six white eggs for 21-23 days.
Eared-Grebe,Podiceps nigricollis,Grebes,Prairie lakes; ponds; in winter; open lakes; salt bays. Favored nesting areas are lakes or large ponds with extensive marshy borders. Opportunistic; it may quickly occupy new or temporary habitats. During migration and winter; mainly on large freshwater or alkaline lakes. Also on coastal bays; but seen less often on ocean than Horned Grebe.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled by feet. Also takes many insects and other items from surface of water.,Usually 3-5; rarely 1-6. Whitish at first; becoming nest-stained brown. Incubation (by both sexes) about 21 days. Young:  Leave nest after last egg hatches; are tended and fed by both parents. Adults may separate; each taking part of brood. Young may ride on parents' backs when small. May be independent by 21 days after hatching; age at first flight not well known. One brood per year; rarely 2.,Mostly insects and crustaceans. Feeds on insects (such as aquatic beetles; dragonfly larvae; flies; mayflies); crustaceans; mollusks; tadpoles; a few small fish. During autumn stopover on large alkaline lakes; may feed mainly on brine shrimp. Young are fed mainly on insects. Like other grebes; sometimes eats feathers. ,Courtship displays are complex. Male and female may swim side by side while turning heads and calling loudly; also face each other while rearing up out of water and turning heads from side to side; at climax of display; pair may rear up to vertical position and rush across surface of water side by side. Nest:  Built by both sexes; a floating platform of weeds; anchored to standing vegetation in shallow water. 
Eared-Quetzal,Euptilotis neoxenus,Trogons,Pine forests in mountains. In Arizona; has been found in several canyons; all with pine-oak forest and with other conifers such as Douglas-fir. In Mexico; occurs mostly at elevations of 6;000-10;000' in the mountains; in coniferous and pine-oak forest; often near sheer rocky cliffs.,Will perch quietly; turning and tilting its head slowly as it peers about. After spotting a choice berry; or an insect sitting on a leaf; the bird will fly out and hover as it plucks the item; and then swoop away to another perch. Also; at times may fly up to catch insects in mid-air.,Apparently 2 eggs make up the usual clutch; eggs are pale blue. Incubation is probably by both parents; but details and incubation period not well known. Young: Fed by both parents. Adults are very wary around the nest; and easily disturbed by human intruders. Development of young and age at first flight are not well known.,Mostly insects and fruits. Diet not known in detail. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; especially big ones such as katydids and large caterpillars. Also eats many small fruits and berries; such as those of madrone; especially in late summer and fall. ,Breeding behavior is poorly known. Only a few nests have been observed; including one in Arizona. Breeding activity seems to be concentrated in late summer and early fall. Nest site is in cavity in tree. Those found so far have been in apparent old flicker holes in large dead or partly-dead trees; often growing well up on slopes of canyons. Nest cavities have been 25-70' above the ground. 
Eastern-Bluebird,Sialia sialis,Thrushes,Open country with scattered trees; farms; roadsides. Breeds in many kinds of semi-open habitats; including cut-over or burned areas; forest clearings; farm country; open pine woods; locally in suburbs where there are extensive lawns and good nest sites. Wanders to other habitats in winter.,Does much foraging by perching low and fluttering down to ground to catch insects; often hovering to pick up items rather than landing. Also catches some insects in mid-air; and may take some while hovering among foliage. Feeds on berries by perching or making short hovering flights in trees.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. Pale blue; unmarked; sometimes white. Incubation is mostly by female; about 13-16 days. Young: Both parents bring food to the nestlings; and young from a previous brood also help to feed them in some cases. Young leave the nest at about 18-19 days on average. 2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including crickets; grasshoppers; beetles; and many others; also spiders; earthworms; snails; rarely small lizards or tree frogs. Also eats many berries; especially in winter. ,As a courtship display; male may sing and flutter in front of the female with his wings and tail partly spread. While perched close together; pairs may preen each other's feathers; male may feed female. Nest: Placed in cavity; typically in natural hollow in tree; in old woodpecker hole; or in birdhouse. Usually nests fairly low (2-20' above the ground); occasionally up to 50'. Nest in cavity (built mostly by female) is a loosely constructed cup of weeds; twigs; and dry grass; lined with finer grass; sometimes with animal hair or feathers. 
Eastern-Kingbird,Tyrannus tyrannus,Tyrant Flycatchers,Wood edges; river groves; farms; shelterbelts; orchards; roadsides. In summer; requires open space for hunting and trees for nesting; habitat ranges from clearings within forest to open grassland with few scattered trees. Often common around edges of marshes; farmland; native tallgrass prairie. Winters in tropical forest; especially around edges and along rivers.,Forages by watching from a perch and then flying out to catch insects. May capture food in mid-air; or may hover while taking items (insects; berries) from foliage. In cold weather; when few insects are flying; may feed on ground.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. White to pinkish-white; heavily blotched with brown; lavender; and gray. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; 16-18 days (perhaps sometimes shorter). Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 16-18 days; young may be tended by parents for more than a month after fledging.,Mostly insects; some fruit. Insects make up majority of summer diet; included are many beetles; wasps; bees; winged ants; grasshoppers; flies; leafhoppers; and others. Sometimes claimed to be a serious predator on honeybees; but there is little evidence for this. Also eats many berries and wild fruits. Winter diet not well known; but feeds heavily on berries in tropical forest. ,In courtship; the male displays with rapid up-and-down flight; zigzags; backwards somersaults; and other aerial acrobatics. The red patch of crown feathers; usually concealed; may be visible during displays. Nest site is usually in deciduous tree or large shrub; 7-30'  above the ground; sometimes lower or much higher. Sometimes on powerline towers; on dead snags standing in water; on top of fence post; or other odd site. Nest (built by female; perhaps with help from male) is a bulky cup of weed stalks; twigs; grass; lined with fine grass and sometimes animal hair. 
Eastern-Meadowlark,Sturnella magna,Blackbirds and Orioles,Open fields and pastures; meadows; prairies. Breeds in natural grasslands; meadows; weedy pastures; also in hayfields and sometimes in fields of other crops. Winters in many kinds of natural and cultivated fields. In the Midwest; tends to prefer taller and lusher grass than Western Meadowlark; but in the Southwest it lives in very arid desert grasslands.,Forages by walking on the ground; taking insects and seeds from the ground and from low plants. May probe in the soil with its bill. In winter; may forage in flocks.,3-5; sometimes up to 7. White; heavily spotted with brown and purple. Incubation is by female; about 13-15 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings (but female does more). Young leave nest after 11-12 days; when still unable to fly; and are tended by parents for at least 2 more weeks. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Majority of diet consists of insects; especially in summer; when it eats many grasshoppers; crickets; beetles and their larvae; caterpillars; ants; true bugs; and others; also spiders. Seeds and waste grain make up over one-fourth of annual diet; and are eaten especially in fall and winter. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing. In courtship; male faces female; puffs out chest feathers and points bill straight up to show off black "V;" spreads tail widely; and flicks wings; he may even jump in the air in this posture. Male may have more than one mate. Nest: Placed on the ground; in areas with dense grass and other low cover; in a small depression in soil. Nest (built by female) is a domed structure with the entrance on the side; made of grass stems interwoven with surrounding growth. Usually has narrow trails or "runways" leading to nest through the grass. 
Eastern-Phoebe,Sayornis phoebe,Tyrant Flycatchers,Streamsides; farms; woodland edges. In breeding season; typically found near water in woodland or semi-open country. May be limited mostly by availability of good nest sites; which are often along streams. In migration and winter; found around edges of woods; brushy areas; often near water.,Forages by watching from a perch and flying out to catch insects. Most are caught in mid-air; some are taken from foliage while hovering briefly. Also drops to the ground to pick up insects there. Perches in shrubs or trees to eat berries.,4-5; sometimes 2-6. White; sometimes with a few dots of reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; about 16 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young usually leave nest about 16 days after hatching. Adults typically raise 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects; some berries. Insects make up great majority of summer diet; included are many small wasps; bees; beetles; flies; true bugs; grasshoppers; and others. Also eats some spiders; ticks; and millipedes. Small fruits and berries are eaten often during the cooler months; and are probably an important part of the winter diet. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing; especially at dawn. Occasionally one male may have two mates; and may help to feed the young in two nests at once. Nest: Original sites were probably always on vertical streambanks or small rock outcrops in the woods; with a niche providing support below and some shelter above. Now often builds nest under bridges; in barns; in culverts; or in other artificial sites. Same site may be used repeatedly; and may build on top of old nest. Nest (built by female) is an open cup with a solid base of mud; built up with moss; leaves; and grass; lined with fine grass and animal hair. 
Eastern-Screech-Owl,Megascops asio,Superb Owls,Woodlands; farm groves; shade trees. Generally favors deciduous or mixed woods; but may be found in any habitat having some open ground and some large trees; from forest to isolated groves to suburban yards. May be absent from some areas because of lack of dead snags with suitable nesting holes.,Forages at dusk and at night. Hunts mostly by watching from a perch and then swooping down to take prey from the ground or from foliage. Also catches flying insects in the air. Can locate prey by sound as well as by sight.,4-5; sometimes 2-8. White. Incubation is mostly by female; averages about 26 days. Male brings food to female during incubation. Young: Both parents bring food for young. Adults may bring back small; wormlike Blind Snakes and release them in nest; where the snakes burrow in debris in bottom of cavity; feeding on insects there; perhaps helping protect the young from parasites. Young leave the nest about 4 weeks after hatching; are fed by parents for some time thereafter.,Mostly large insects and small rodents. Wide variation in diet. Eats many beetles; moths; crickets; other large insects. Catches mice and other rodents; shrews; sometimes bats; also some small birds; lizards; frogs; spiders; earthworms; crayfish; many other small creatures. Some catch many small fish. ,Courtship displays of male include bowing; raising wings; clicking bill. Male brings food to female. Mated pairs preen each other's feathers; call in duet. Nest site is in cavity in tree; including natural hollows and abandoned woodpecker holes; will also use artificial nest boxes. Usually 10-30' above ground; can be 5-80' up. 
Eastern-Towhee,Pipilo erythrophthalmus,New World Sparrows,Open woods; undergrowth; brushy edges. Habitat varies with region; but always in brushy areas. In the Northeast; typically in understory of open woods.,Forages mostly on the ground; frequently scratching in the leaf-litter. Also sometimes forages up in shrubs and low trees.,3-4; sometimes 5; rarely 2-6. Creamy white to very pale gray; with spots of brown often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching; may remain with parents for some time thereafter. Often 2 broods per year; sometimes 3 in southern part of range.,Mostly insects; seeds; berries. Diet varies with season and region. Eats many insects; especially in summer; including beetles; caterpillars; moths; true bugs; ants; and many others; also spiders; snails; and millipedes. Rarely may eat small salamanders; lizards; or snakes. Also eats many seeds; plus acorns; berries; and small fruits. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing; often from a high perch. In courtship; male may give a soft "whispered" version of song; may chase female; or may rapidly spread tail to show off white spots. Nest site is on the ground under a shrub; or in low bushes; usually less than 5' above the ground. Nest (built by female) is an open cup of grass; twigs; weeds; rootlets; strips of bark; lined with finer materials; sometimes including animal hair. 
Eastern-Whip-poor-will,Antrostomus vociferus,Nightjars,Leafy woodlands. Breeds in rich moist woodlands; either deciduous or mixed; seems to avoid purely coniferous forest. Winter habitats are also in wooded areas.,Forages at night; especially at dusk and dawn and on moonlit nights. Forages by flying out from a perch in a tree; or in low; continuous flight along the edges of woods and clearings; sometimes by fluttering up from the ground. Captures insects in its wide; gaping mouth and swallows them whole.,2. Whitish; marked with brown and gray. Incubation is by both parents (usually more by female); 19-21 days. Young: Cared for by both parents. Adults feed young by regurgitating insects. Age of young at first flight about 20 days. May raise 1 or 2 broods per year; female may lay second clutch while male is still caring for young from first brood.,Insects. Feeds on night-flying insects; especially moths; also beetles; mosquitoes; and many others. ,Nesting activity may be timed so that adults are feeding young primarily on nights when moon is more than half full; when moonlight makes foraging easier for them. Male sings at night to defend territory and to attract a mate. Courtship behavior not well known; male approaches female on ground with much head-bobbing; bowing; and sidling about. Nest site is on ground; in shady woods but often near the edge of a clearing; on open soil covered with dead leaves. No nest built; eggs laid on flat ground. 
Eastern-Wood-Pewee,Contopus virens,Tyrant Flycatchers,Woodlands; groves. Breeds in forest (mainly deciduous; sometimes mixed; and seldom coniferous forest). Favors margins of clearings; such as around meadows; roadsides; ponds; or small openings in the forest. Winters at forest edges and in scrubby woods in tropics.,Does most foraging by watching from an exposed perch within a tree; then flying out to catch an insect in the air. Also takes insects from foliage or twigs while hovering; and may descend to pick insects from grass or other plants close to the ground.,3; sometimes 2; rarely 4. Whitish; with brown and lavender blotches often concentrated toward larger end. Incubation is by female; 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Age of young at first flight about 14-18 days.,Mostly insects. Feeds almost entirely on insects and other arthropods; taking only small numbers of berries. Diet in summer includes various kinds of flies; also wasps; bees; winged ants; beetles; moths; true bugs; and grasshoppers; also some spiders and millipedes. ,Male sings in spring; especially at dawn and dusk; to defend nesting territory. Courtship behavior is not well known; may involve male actively chasing female through treetops. Nest site is in tree (usually deciduous); saddled on a horizontal branch well out from the trunk. Usually 15-45' above ground; can be lower or much higher. Nest (probably built by female alone) is compact open cup of grass; plant fibers; and spiderwebs; the outside usually decorated with lichens. Nest seems small for size of bird. From the side or below; nest may look like a bump or knot on the branch. 
Eastern-Yellow-Wagtail,Motacilla tschutschensis,Wagtails and Pipits,Willow scrub on tundra; marshy country. In Alaska; breeds on tundra; especially in areas with low thickets of dwarf willow or birch. In the Old World; various races of Yellow Wagtail are found in practically any kind of open country.,Feeds on ground or along edge of very shallow water. Forages by walking and picking up items; by making quick dashes to grab active insects; or by flying up to catch insects in the air. Sometimes may pick insects from foliage while hovering.,In Alaska; 4-5 eggs; sometimes 3-6. Whitish to buff; heavily dotted with brown. Incubation is by both parents (but female may do more); 11-13 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10-13 days after hatching; but often unable to fly for another 3-6 days.,Mostly insects. Diet in North America not known in detail. In Eurasia; feeds on a wide variety of insects including midges and other flies; beetles; aphids; ants; and many others. Also eats spiders; plus a few small snails; worms; berries; and seeds. ,Male may sing in flight to defend territory and attract a mate. In courtship on ground; male may crouch with drooped wings and tail; body feathers fluffed up; while he runs around female; also may hover over her with tail spread widely. Nest site is on ground; usually well hidden under low matted shrub or overhanging grass; or tucked into side of sedge hummock. Nest (probably built by female only) is a cup of grass; leaves; weeds; moss; lichens; lined with softer material such as animal hair or feathers. 
Egyptian-Goose,Alopochen aegyptiaca,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Elegant-Tern,Thalasseus elegans,Gulls and Terns,Coast; bays; beaches. Generally on ocean; close to shore over shallow waters; concentrating around bays and estuaries. Sometimes far out to sea. Extremely rare on fresh waters inland. Nests on sandy or rocky islands.,Forages by flying over water; hovering and plunge-diving to catch prey below the surface.,One; rarely 2. Buff to white; blotched or spotted with dark brown. Incubation is probably by both parents; incubation period not well known; but more than 20 days. Young: May leave nest after a few days; gather in group (called a "creche"). Both parents probably feed young. Age at first flight and at independence not well known.,Small fish. Feeds mostly on small fish; probably also taking some small crustaceans. In California waters; preys heavily on northern anchovy; increasing population of anchovies there coincided with increase in Elegant Terns. ,Breeds in colonies. Sometimes associated with other terns (or; in Mexico; with Heermann's Gulls). In California; appears to prefer nesting close to the larger Caspian Terns; which may help in defense against predators. Courtship displays on ground involve both members of pair drooping wings; stretching neck upward; raising and lowering bills. Nest site is on open bare ground. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a simple scrape in the soil. 
Elegant-Trogon,Trogon elegans,Trogons,Mountain forests; pine-oak or sycamore canyons. In Arizona; breeds in canyons through the pine-oak zone of mountains; almost always where sycamores grow along flowing streams. In Mexico and Central America; lives in canyons and scrubby lowland woods in relatively dry areas; avoiding tall rain forest.,A trogon will perch quietly; turning and tilting its head very slowly as it peers about. After spotting a choice berry; or an insect sitting on a leaf; the bird will fly out and hover for a few seconds as it plucks the item; and then swoop away to another perch.,2; sometimes 3; occasionally 4. Incubation is by both parents; 22-23 days; female incubates at night and at midday; male in early morning and late afternoon. Young: Cared for and fed by both parents. Young leave the nest about 20-23 days after hatching; but are dependent on their parents for a few more weeks.,Mostly insects and fruits. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; especially big ones such as katydids; cicadas; walkingsticks; and large caterpillars. Will also eat small lizards. Also eats many small fruits and berries; such as chokecherry and wild grape; especially in late summer and fall. ,Male defends nesting territory with repeated calling in spring. In courtship; male leads female to potential nest sites; calling from inside cavity; female enters to indicate acceptance. Nest site is in cavity in tree. In Arizona; usually in old flicker hole in dead tree or limb; especially in sycamores; 8-50' above the ground; typically about 25-26' up. Sometimes competes actively for nest sites with other birds; such as Sulphur-bellied Flycatchers. Little or no nest material added; eggs laid on bottom of cavity or on accumulated debris. 
Elf-Owl,Micrathene whitneyi,Superb Owls,Saguaro deserts; wooded canyons. Within its United States range; found in any lowland habitat providing cover and good nesting cavities. Most common in deserts with many tall saguaro cactus or large mesquites; and in canyons in the foothills; especially around sycamores or large oaks.,Hunts only at dusk and at night. Watches from a perch and then swoops down to take prey off the ground; or flies low; pausing to hover before pouncing. Also flies out from a perch to catch flying insects. May hover among foliage and then catch insects that are flushed from the leaves. Apparently catches all prey with its feet. May remove the stinger before eating scorpions.,3; sometimes 2-4; rarely 1-5. White. Incubation is by female only; about 24 days; male brings food to female during incubation. Young: Female remains with young most of the time at first; while male brings food for female and young. After about 2 weeks; female hunts for food also. Young leave nest at about 27-28 days; are cared for by parents for at least several days thereafter.,Insects and other arthropods. In summer; feeds heavily on moths; beetles; and crickets; as well as katydids and other insects active at night. Also feeds on scorpions and spiders. Rarely eats lizards and other small vertebrates. ,Early in breeding season; male sings loudly and persistently at night to defend territory and attract female. In courtship; male feeds female. Male sings from inside potential nest hole to lure female to it. Nest site is almost always in old woodpecker hole in tree or giant cactus (or in utility pole). Height varies: usually 15-50' above ground in streamside sycamores; 10-30' up in saguaros. 
Emperor-Goose,Anser canagicus,Ducks and Geese,In summer; tundra; in winter; rocky shores; mudflats. Closely tied to salt water at all seasons. Most nesting areas on low marshy tundra within 10 miles of coast; near sloughs and rivers affected by tides. Flocks in migration stop over on large coastal estuaries. In winter; found along shorelines. Autumn strays south to Oregon and California may appear well inland.,On breeding grounds; forages mostly on land; grubbing for roots; grazing on fresh growth. During migration and winter; forages on mudflats exposed by falling tides;  walking on wet mud or in shallow water.,4-6; sometimes 2-8. Creamy white; becoming nest-stained. Females frequently lay eggs in each others' nests. Incubation is by female only; typically 24 days; up to 27. Young: goslings can walk and swim within hours after hatching; usually leave nest in less than a day; following parents to good feeding areas that may be several miles from nest site. Both parents tend young. Adults with broods adopt a threat posture with neck outstretched and bill pointed toward source of disturbance. Young fledge in 50-60 days.,Varies with season. On breeding grounds; mostly plant material: roots and bulbs early in season; fresh growth of sedges and other plants during summer. In late summer; may feed on crowberry or blueberry. During migration and winter feeds heavily on clams and mussels; also on marine algae and other plants. ,May mate for life; and pairs seem to be formed before arrival on breeding grounds. Nest site on small island in pond; raised hummock or shoreline; surrounded by low dead vegetation but with good visibility. Nest is a shallow scrape lined with dead plant material and with large amounts of down. 
Eurasian-Collared-Dove,Streptopelia decaocto,Pigeons and Doves,Suburbs; farmland; wood edges; open country. Apparently very adaptable. In original Asian range; found in semi-open dry country with scattered trees and groves. In Europe; favors suburbs and farmland. North American populations are most common around residential areas or farmland having combination of trees and open ground; and they seem to thrive better in small towns than in larger cities.,Forages mostly while walking on the ground. When not breeding; usually forages in flocks. Sometimes flutters among branches of trees or shrubs to take berries.,2; sometimes 1. White. Incubation is by both parents; 14-18 days. Young: Both parents feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest at about 15-20 days; are tended by parents about another week. In Europe; reported to raise up to 6 broods per year; may also do so in Florida; where may breed almost throughout the year.,Mostly seeds; some berries and insects. Diet in North America not yet well known. In Europe; feeds on waste grain of many cultivated crops; also seeds of many plants; eats some berries and small insects; rarely snails. Also eats bread crumbs and other foods provided by humans. ,Male displays by flying up at steep angle with noisy wingbeats; then gliding down in spiral with wings and tail fully spread; giving harsh call during glide. Also attracts female by calling and by ritualized bowing display. Nest: Male leads female to potential nest sites; female chooses. Site is in tree or shrub; sometimes on manmade structure; 6-70' (usually 10-40') above ground. Nest is flimsy platform of sticks and twigs; male gathers material; female builds. 
Eurasian-Dotterel,Charadrius morinellus,Plovers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Eurasian-Hobby,Falco subbuteo,Falcons,In its native habitat; open wooded areas; woodland edges and fields. Prefers semi-open areas with sufficient trees or shrubs for perching. In North America; most often seen near coasts in summer.,NA,NA,NA,NA
Eurasian-Jackdaw,Corvus monedula,Crows; Magpies; Jays,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Eurasian-Kestrel,Falco tinnunculus,Falcons,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Eurasian-Skylark,Alauda arvensis,Larks,Open country; fields. Introduced population on Vancouver Island lives in open areas with fairly tall grass. On native range in Eurasia; found in any kind of open country; farmland; extensive lawns; edges of marshes.,Forages by walking on ground in open areas; picking up items from ground; and pecking at plant stalks and seed heads.,Usually 3-5. Pale gray; sometimes with greenish tinge; heavily spotted with olive or brown. Incubation is by female only; about 11 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Young often leave nest after 8-10 days; but not able to fly well until 10 days later.,Seeds; insects. Diet in North America not known in detail. In Europe; feeds mostly on seeds of grasses and weeds; grain in agricultural fields; and leaves of various ground plants. Also eats many insects (including beetles; caterpillars; and others) and some spiders; millipedes; and snails; mostly in summer. Young birds are fed mostly insects at first. ,Male may sing at any season; but most intensively in early spring to defend nesting territory and attract a mate. In typical song-flight display; male takes off from ground and flies up in steep spiral to as high as 150-300' above the ground; singing most of the way up; then hovers and circles for several minutes; singing continuously; before gradually spiraling down to ground while continuing to sing. Nest site is on ground; in an open area among short grass. Nest (probably built by female only) is a slight depression in the ground lined with grass and rootlets; with an inner lining of finer grass and sometimes animal hair. 
Eurasian-Tree-Sparrow,Passer montanus,Old World Sparrows,Farmland; towns. In North America; fairly local in open country with scattered bushes and trees; also in some suburban and city areas. In Europe and Asia; found in many kinds of semi-open habitats; woodland edges; towns; farms.,Forages mostly while hopping on the ground. May also feed up in shrubs or trees at times. Often forages in small flocks.,4-6; rarely up to 8. White to grayish white; marked with brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 12-14 days after hatching; may be fed by parents for another week. One pair of adults may raise 2 or 3 broods per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet in North America is not known in detail; but undoubtedly includes the seeds of various weeds and grasses; also waste grain in fields. Also eats many insects; perhaps especially in summer. ,Some adults may remain in pairs at all seasons; or pairs may form well before nesting season starts. Nest: Placed inside a cavity; such as a natural hollow in tree; old woodpecker hole; birdhouse; or hole in building or under eaves. Unlike House Sparrow; seldom or never builds nest in open branches. Nest (probably built by both parents) is a bulky mass of grass; weeds; straw; trash; sometimes lined with feathers. 
Eurasian-Wigeon,Mareca penelope,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; lakes; bays; fields. In winter in North America often on marshy ponds with open ground nearby; or in flooded fields; also on shallow coastal estuaries and sheltered bays. Presence of American Wigeon is best key to good habitat for Eurasian Wigeon.,Forages by grazing on land; by dabbling at surface of water; sometimes by submerging head and neck. May steal food brought to surface by other species such as coots or geese. May feed by day or night.,8-9; sometimes 6-12. Whitish to pale buff. Incubation is by female only; 24-25 days. Young: leave nest and go to water shortly after hatching. Young are tended by female but find all their own food. Age at first flight 40-45 days.,Almost entirely plant material. Diet in North America not well known; in Europe; eats wide variety of leaves; stems; roots; seeds. Eats some insects in summer. ,Known to breed only in Old World; but likely to be found nesting in North America eventually. Several males may compete with each other in courting one female; jostling for position. Displays of male include lifting tips of folded wings to expose white wing patch; raising head while giving whistled call; lowering bill to display buffy crown patch to female. Nest site is on ground under dense vegetation; usually near water. Nest is shallow depression lined with grass and with large amount of down. 
European-Golden-Plover,Pluvialis apricaria,Plovers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
European-Starling,Sturnus vulgaris,Starlings and Mynas,Cities; parks; farms; open groves; fields. Most numerous in farm country and in suburbs and cities; but inhabits almost any kind of disturbed habitat. Usually scarce or absent in extensive wild areas of forest; scrub; or desert; but will breed around buildings or settlements in the midst of such habitats.,Forages mostly on the ground in open areas; often probing in soil with bill. Sometimes feeds on fruit up in trees; and sometimes catches flying insects in the air. Usually forages in flocks.,4-6; rarely 7. Greenish white to bluish white; unmarked. Incubation is by both parents (female does more); about 12 days. Starlings sometimes lay eggs in each other's nests. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 21 days after hatching. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects; berries; and seeds. Diet is quite varied. Eats mostly insects when available; especially beetles; grasshoppers; flies; and caterpillars; also spiders; snails; earthworms; and other invertebrates. Especially in fall and winter; eats a wide variety of berries; fruits; and seeds. Sometimes visits flowers for nectar. Will come to bird feeders for a variety of items. ,Male establishes territory and chooses nest site; singing to attract a mate. When a female arrives; male perches next to nest site and sings; often waving his wings. Male sometimes has more than one mate. Nest site is in any kind of cavity; usually in natural hollow or woodpecker hole in tree; in birdhouse; or (in southwest) in hole in giant cactus. Sometimes in holes or crevices in buildings or other odd spots. Nest construction begun by male; often completed by female (who may throw out some of male's nest material). Nest is a loose mass of twigs; weeds; grass; leaves; trash; feathers; with slight depression for eggs. 
Evening-Grosbeak,Coccothraustes vespertinus,Finches,Conifer forests; in winter; box elders and other maples; also fruiting shrubs. Breeds in coniferous and mixed forests; often associated with spruce and fir in northern forest; with pines in western mountains. In migration and winter; may be equally common in deciduous groves in woodlands and semi-open country.,Forages mostly in trees and shrubs; sometimes on ground. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale blue to blue-green; blotched with brown; gray; purple. Incubation is by female only; about 11-14 days. Male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 2 weeks after hatching. 1 or 2 broods per year.,Mostly seeds; some berries and insects. Seeds make up majority of diet; especially seeds of box elder; ash; maple; locust; and other trees. Also feeds on buds of deciduous trees; berries; small fruits; weed seeds. Will feed on oozing maple sap. Eats some insects in summer. At bird feeders; very fond of sunflower seeds. Will eat fine gravel for minerals and salts. Huge bill allows it to crack large seeds with ease. ,In courtship; male "dances" with head and tail raised; wings drooped and vibrating; as he swivels back and forth. Male frequently feeds female. In another courtship display; both members of a pair may bow alternately. Nest: Usual site is on horizontal branch (often well out from trunk) or in vertical fork of tree. Height varies; usually 20-60' above ground; can be 10-100' up. Nest (built by female) is a rather loosely made cup of twigs; lined with fine grass; moss; rootlets; pine needles. 
Eyebrowed-Thrush,Turdus obscurus,Thrushes,NA,NA,NA,Mostly insects; snails; and berries.,NA
Falcated-Duck,Mareca falcata,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Fan-tailed-Warbler,Basileuterus lachrymosus,Wood Warblers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Ferruginous-Hawk,Buteo regalis,Hawks and Eagles,Plains; prairies. Found at all seasons in very open and dry country. Inhabits dry grassland; sagebrush plains; saltbush and greasewood flats; rangeland; desert. In winter; also in agricultural country; including over plowed fields.,Hunts by watching for prey while soaring high; flying low; or from a raised perch. Sometimes waits on ground near active burrow of pocket gopher; then catches the rodent as it comes to surface.,2-4; sometimes up to 6 or more. Pale bluish-white fading to white; usually marked with brown. Incubation is by both sexes  but female does more; and male brings food to her. Incubation period 32-33 days. Young: Female remains with young at first; male brings food; female feeds it to young. After about 3 weeks; both parents hunt. Age of young at first flight about 40-50 days.,Mostly small to medium-sized mammals. Feeds on most readily available small prey; such as young jackrabbits; ground squirrels; pocket gophers; kangaroo rats; also cottontails; mice; others. Also eats birds; snakes; large insects. ,Pairs may circle high above nesting territory; calling. Nest site is usually in top of tree; 20-50' above ground; but can be as low as 6' (available trees may be very short). Sometimes nests on cliff or on ground. Nest is bulky structure of sticks and debris; lined with finer materials; including cow dung. Historically; some nests were built of bison bones and lined with bison dung. Nest may be reused and added to annually until it becomes huge. 
Ferruginous-Pygmy-Owl,Glaucidium brasilianum,Superb Owls,Mesquite thickets; desert riverine woods; saguaros. In United States; currently most numerous in low stands of live oak and mesquite in southern Texas. Was formerly common in mesquite forest along rivers and in desert dominated by saguaro cactus. In tropics; found in wide range of lowland habitats; mostly in semi-open country.,Apparently hunts most actively near dawn and dusk. Hunts by watching from raised perch; then darting out in very rapid flight to capture prey in talons. Notably bold and aggressive for its small size.,3-4; sometimes 5. White. Apparently incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 28 days; male brings food to female during incubation.   Young: Both parents take part in providing food for young; male may do most of hunting at first. Age of young at first flight about 27-30 days.,Includes insects; birds; rodents; lizards. Diet is not well known; and probably varies by region. Among known foods are large insects (including crickets; caterpillars; and beetles); scorpions; small birds; rodents and other small mammals; and lizards. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Male defends nesting territory with song of monotonous repeated whistles; mostly at dusk and dawn; also at night; sometimes by day. Nest site is in cavity in tree or in giant cactus; usually old woodpecker hole; but sometimes natural hollow in tree. Typically low; 10-30' above ground. 
Field-Sparrow,Spizella pusilla,New World Sparrows,Bushy pastures; brush; scrub. Found at all seasons in brushy overgrown fields; second growth; woodland edges; hedgerows in open country. Sometimes around brushy edges of marshes. Does not usually live in wide-open grassy fields unless they contain scattered shrubs.,Forages on ground or in low vegetation. When feeding on grass seeds; will fly up to perch on grass stems; bending them to ground.,3-5; rarely 2-6. Whitish to pale bluish white; with brownish spots often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; 10-12 days; rarely up to 17 days in cold spring. Nests parasitized by Brown-headed Cowbirds are often deserted. Young: Both parents feed young. Female may begin a 2nd nesting attempt; leaving male to finish rearing 1st brood. If disturbed; young may leave nest as early as 5 days after hatching; more typically 7-8 days. Remain in low vegetation near nest site for several days; able to fly at age 13-14 days. Parents continue to feed them for about another 2 weeks. If nesting interrupted by predators or other disturbance; pairs quickly attempt to renest; one persistent female in Illinois made 10 nesting attempts in 1 season. If nesting successful; 2 broods per season; sometimes 3.,Seeds and insects. Diet is more than 90% seeds in winter; mainly small seeds of grasses. Also eat many grass seeds in summer; but insects make up more than 50% of summer diet. Nestlings are fed spiders and insects; especially caterpillars; with many grasshoppers fed to larger young. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing persistently. Adults with young may put on "broken-wing" act at approach of danger. Nest site on or near the ground in clumps of grass; or in dense low bushes or saplings. Early nests generally on or near ground; later nests often higher. Nest is open cup woven of grasses; lined with finer plant material and hair. Female builds nest; although male may bring nest material. 
Fish-Crow,Corvus ossifragus,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Tidewater; river valleys; swamps; woodland; farmland. Overlaps in habitat with American Crow; but more likely to be near water; especially along coast; where it forages on beaches; marshes; and estuaries. Inland from coast; usually follows the drainages of large rivers; although it may feed in woods or fields a few miles from the water.,Usually forages in flocks. Does most foraging by walking; especially on shores or in very shallow water; also in fields; sometimes forages in trees. May carry mollusks up into the air; then drop them on rocks to break the shells. In colonies of herons and other waterbirds; if adults are frightened from their nests; Fish Crows may destroy many eggs.,4-5. Dull blue-green to gray-green; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is by female; possibly assisted by male; about 16-18 days. Young: Both parents probably bring food to nestlings. Age when young leave the nest not well known; probably 3-4 weeks.,Omnivorous. May feed on practically anything it can find; including carrion; crabs; shrimp; crayfish; a wide variety of insects; berries; seeds; nuts; bird eggs; turtle eggs; and garbage. ,Often a few pairs nest in a loose colony. Courtship may involve male and female flying close together in gliding display flight. Nest site is in upright fork of tree or shrub. May be very low in coastal growth of pines; cedars; or quite high in deciduous trees in inland swamps; nest height may be 5-70' above ground or even higher. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a bulky platform of sticks and strips of bark; lined with softer materials such as grass; rootlets; hair; feathers; paper; pine needles; even manure. 
Five-striped-Sparrow,Amphispiza quinquestriata,New World Sparrows,Dry canyon slopes; rocky hillsides. In Arizona found on steep hillsides; generally above streams; with dense growth of low shrubs such as mesquite; acacia; and hackberry; and taller stands of ocotillo. Known Arizona sites are at elevations from 3;400 to 4;000 feet. In Mexico; also found in dry tropical woods on rocky ground; usually on hillsides.,Forages mostly on the ground and in low vegetation; moving rather slowly and deliberately; picking up small items with bill. Sometimes takes insects from spiderwebs; rarely makes short flights to catch insects in mid-air.,3-4. White; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed young; although female may bring more at first. On hot days; female may spend time standing on edge of nest to shade young. Young leave nest about 9-10 days after hatching; but able to make only short flights at this stage. Young are fed by parents for at least 2 weeks after fledging; may associate with them up to 7 weeks. Usually 1-2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds mainly on insects in summer; particularly caterpillars; moths; and grasshoppers; also ants and others. Also eats seeds and some small berries. Young are fed mostly caterpillars and grasshoppers. ,In Arizona; nests mostly in mid to late summer; after onset of summer rainy season; but pairs may occupy territories by late spring. Male sings persistently to defend nesting territory. Nest site is in dense clump of grass; in low shrub such as hackberry; hopbush; or condalia; or at base of ocotillo; from a few inches to 5' above ground. Nest (built by female) is a deep open cup of grass; lined with finer grass and often with animal hair. 
Flame-colored-Tanager,Piranga bidentata,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Flammulated-Owl,Psiloscops flammeolus,Superb Owls,Open pine forests in mountains. Nests in relatively open forest; typically of ponderosa pine; in cool and fairly dry zones such as mountains of the interior. In some areas; favors groves of aspen. Upper level of forest usually quite open; but may be brushy understory of oaks and other plants. In migration; sometimes found in dense thickets at lower elevations.,Hunts most actively just after dark and near dawn; less in middle of night. Forages by perching and looking for insects; then flying out to catch them. May catch prey in the air or on the ground; but apparently most often takes insects from foliage; hovering momentarily and grabbing them with feet.,2-3; sometimes 4. White or creamy-white. Incubation is by female only; 21-24 days. Male brings food to incubating female at nest. Young: Female remains with nestlings for about 12 days after they hatch; male brings food for female and young. After about 12 days; female also hunts. Young leave nest by about 25 days after hatching; perch in trees nearby. At least sometimes; brood splits up after fledging; each parent tending 1-2 of the young for about another 4 weeks.,Large insects. Feeds almost entirely on insects; especially moths; beetles; and crickets. Also eats a few spiders; centipedes; scorpions; and other arthropods. Almost never eats vertebrates; but once proven to have eaten a shrew. ,Male hoots at night early in season to defend territory and attract a mate. In courtship; female begs; male feeds her. Nest site is in cavity in tree; usually old woodpecker hole; usually 15-40' above ground. Will also use artificial nest boxes. 
Flesh-footed-Shearwater,Ardenna carneipes,Shearwaters and Petrels,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Florida-Scrub-Jay,Aphelocoma coerulescens,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Florida scrublands. Its name is appropriate; for it lives only in Florida scrub; areas of short scrubby oaks growing on sandy soil. This habitat occurs mostly as isolated pockets; and the jays rarely wander away from their own little patch of scrub; making them extremely sedentary.,Forages on the ground and in trees; usually in flocks. Harvests large numbers of acorns and buries them; coming back to retrieve and eat them later.,3-4; sometimes 2-6. Usually light green; spotted with olive or brown. Incubation is by female; usually 17-18 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Fed by both parents and by "helpers" in the nesting group. Young leave nest about 18 days after hatching. 1 brood per year; sometimes 2.,Mostly acorns and arthropods. Acorns make up a major part of the diet at most seasons. Eats a wide variety of insects; especially in summer; as well as a few spiders and snails. Also eats berries; seeds; and some small vertebrates such as reptiles; amphibians; rodents; and the eggs and young of smaller birds. ,Breeds in cooperative flocks. Each nesting territory is occupied by an adult pair and often by one to six "helpers;" usually the pair's offspring from previous years. These additional birds assist in defending the territory and feeding the young. Studies have shown that a pair with "helpers" is likely to raise more young than a pair without. Nest site is in tree or shrub; usually an oak; with sand live oak strongly favored. Nest is usually low; averaging 3-4 feet above the ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is a well-built; thick-walled cup of twigs; grass; and moss; lined with fine rootlets and plant fibers. 
Fork-tailed-Flycatcher,Tyrannus savana,Tyrant Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Fork-tailed-Storm-Petrel,Hydrobates furcatus,Northern Storm-Petrels,Open ocean. Favors cold waters; foraging over continental shelf and farther out to sea; sometimes fairly close to land. Extends north into Bering Sea; and may even occur around edges of floating ice. Nests on islands; mostly hilly islands with good cover of grass or shrubs.,Takes food from surface of water. Forages mostly by hovering and picking at surface with bill; also by dropping into water and then resuming flight; sometimes by picking at items while swimming.,One. Dull white; with fine dark dots around larger end. Incubation is by both sexes. Incubation period averages about 50 days; ranges from 37-68 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. At first young is fed orange oily substance regurgitated by adults; later semi-digested fish. Young fledges about 60 days after hatching; goes out to sea.,Includes fish; crustaceans. Feeds mostly on small fish; crustaceans; and floating natural oils. Skims oily fat (from dead or wounded animals) from surface of water. Also may feed on carrion or floating refuse. ,Nests on islands; commonly in large colonies. Active around nesting sites only at night. Nest:  Excavates burrow in soil or uses natural rock crevices; openings in rock piles; or old burrows of other species (such as puffins). Sometimes two or more pairs have nests in side tunnels branching off from single entrance. Nest chamber usually with little or no lining added; sometimes small amount of grass. 
Forsters-Tern,Sterna forsteri,Gulls and Terns,Marshes (fresh or salt); lakes; bays; beaches. During summer is mostly around marshes; either coastal salt marsh or large marshy lakes in the interior. May visit any waters during migration. Winters mostly along coast; especially around estuaries; inlets; coastal lagoons; sheltered bays.,Forages by flying and hovering over water; plunging to take fish from just below surface. Also may dip down in flight to take items from surface; and will forage in the air; catching insects in flight.,3; sometimes 1-4. Olive to buff; variably marked with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-25 days. Young: Both parents feed young in nest. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Fish; insects; other small aquatic life. Diet is mostly fish at all seasons; but in summer on marshes may eat many insects. Also eats small crustaceans; frogs. ,May breed in loose colonies; with spacing dictated by arrangement of good nesting sites. Sometimes associated with colonies of Yellow-headed Blackbird. Aggressive toward other birds in vicinity of nest. Nest site is in marsh; on top of dense vegetation or mats of floating dead plants; often on top of muskrat house. Sometimes placed on ground near marsh; or on abandoned nest of grebe. Where it nests in same marsh as Black Tern; Forster's tends to choose higher and drier nest sites. Nest (built by both sexes) is platform of reeds and grasses; with deep hollow at center lined with finer material and shells. 
Fox-Sparrow,Passerella iliaca,New World Sparrows,Wooded areas; undergrowth; brush. Breeds in brushy areas including woodland edges and clearings; streamside thickets; scrubby second growth; stunted coastal forest. Winters in similar habitats; also in brushy fields; chaparral; well-vegetated suburbs and parks.,Forages on ground; characteristically scratching in the soil or snow; making a little forward jump and then scratching back with both feet at once.,2-5. Tends to lay fewer eggs in southern part of breeding range. Eggs pale green to greenish white; heavily blotched with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-11 days after hatching.,Mostly seeds and insects. During breeding season; consumes many insects; including beetles; flies; true bugs; and others; also spiders and millipedes. Majority of diet at other seasons consists of seeds; mainly of weeds (such as smartweed) and grasses. Also eats some berries; in coastal areas; may feed on tiny crustaceans and other marine life on beaches. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male sings in spring to defend nesting territory; may be aggressive toward intruders of other species as well as his own. Nest site is often on ground under dense cover of low shrubs. Sometimes nests up in shrubs or low trees; rarely more than 8' above ground. Nest (probably built by female) is open cup made of grass; weeds; moss; lined with fine dry grass. Nests built above ground usually larger and more bulky; with more twigs used in outer walls. 
Franklins-Gull,Leucophaeus pipixcan,Gulls and Terns,Prairies; inland marshes; in winter; coasts; ocean. Nests on prairie marshes where habitat is extensive and water is fairly deep; forages during summer and migration over agricultural fields; prairie; flooded pasture; marshes; estuaries. In winter mostly along coast; in protected bays; estuaries; sometimes far offshore or on lakes well inland.,Forages by walking or wading on ground; by swimming; or by catching insects in flight.,3; sometimes 2; rarely 4. Buff to olive or brown; blotched with brown or black. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-26 days. Young: Both parents feed young and brood them while they are small; one parent remains with young at all times. Young remain in nest at least 20 days; then may swim short distances around nest. Capable of flight at about 35 days; but fed by parents for at least another week.,Mainly insects; fish. Diet in summer is mostly insects (especially aquatic insects and grasshoppers) and earthworms; also seeds; leeches; snails; crayfish. In some regions; young are fed mostly earthworms. During winter may eat many small fish and crustaceans in addition to insects. ,Breeds in colonies. In courtship; pairs stand upright and alternately turn heads toward and away from each other; male may feed female. Nest site is in marsh; where water may be several feet deep. Nest (built by both sexes) is large floating mass of bulrushes; cattails; other plant material; often anchored to standing vegetation. Much of nest material is stolen from other nests in colony. 
Fulvous-Whistling-Duck,Dendrocygna bicolor,Ducks and Geese,Fresh marshes (mostly coastal); irrigated land. At most seasons; favors shallow freshwater or brackish marshes in flat open country of coastal plain; also flooded rice fields; other agricultural fields; ponds; lakes. Migrants or strays may appear at any type of water; but most likely at marshy shallows.,When feeding in water; may dabble at surface; or tip up with tail up and head and forepart of body submerged. Also sometimes dives to take food underwater. Does much of its foraging in damp fields (especially in rice fields in the U.S.).,12-14; sometimes 6-16. Whitish; becoming nest-stained. Females may lay eggs in each others' nests (or nests of other species); such "dump nests" can contain 60+ eggs. Incubation by both sexes; 24-26 days. May leave eggs unattended for hours on warm days until close to hatching time. Young: can swim and dive well. Tended by both parents; but find their own food. Young fledge at about 2 months.,Mostly seeds. Diet apparently more than 95% plant material; mainly seeds of aquatic plants and grasses; including paspalum; wild millet; sedge; smartweed; and many others. Also eats a few aquatic insects. ,May pair for life. In courtship; 2 (or more) may fly in large circles with much twisting and turning. Mated pairs may rear up on water with neck in tight S-curve and tread water side by side. Nest site is on ground next to water or in dense marsh just above water. Nest (built by female only?) woven of grass; sedges; cattails; sometimes with canopy of same materials above. Unlike most waterfowl; no down added to nest. 
Gadwall,Mareca strepera,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; ponds; marshes. In summer mainly around fresh or alkaline lakes in prairie regions or western intermountain valleys where land is open; not forested; also locally in coastal marshes. In migration and winter on marshes; lakes; estuaries; but generally not on salt water.,Forages mainly while swimming by taking items from surface or by dabbling with head submerged; sometimes by up-ending; occasionally by diving. Rather seldom forages on land.,8-11; sometimes 5-13. White. 2 or more females sometimes lay in same nest. Incubation is by female only; 24-27 days. Young: leave nest shortly after hatching. Female leads young to water; where they find their own food; often seen on more open water than young of other dabbling ducks. Young are capable of flight 48-59 days after hatching.,Mostly plant material. Feeds mainly on aquatic plants. Compared to other dabbling ducks; eats more leaves and stems of these plants; fewer seeds. Also eats small numbers of mollusks; insects; crustaceans; rarely small fish. Very young ducklings eat many insects at first before shifting to more vegetarian diet. ,In one courtship display; male pulls head far back on shoulders and raises rear part of body out of water; with wingtips lifted to show off white patch in wing. Compared to most ducks; nesting begins rather late. Nest: female; accompanied by male; makes prospecting flights to seek site for nest. Site is usually near water; on dry land; surrounded by dense weeds or grass. Nest (built by female) is in a shallow depression; built of grasses; weeds; lined with down. 
Gambels-Quail,Callipepla gambelii,New World Quail,Brushy desert; canyons. May be in very dry country; but concentrates near sources of water. Favors typical Sonoran desert; with open ground and wide variety of shrubs; low trees; and cactus; often around mesquite thickets. Avoids unbroken grassland with no shrubs. May be common in open suburbs where some land is left undeveloped.,Forages in flocks from late summer to early spring. Does most feeding on ground; but readily goes up into shrubs and low trees for berries; leaves; buds.,10-12; sometimes more. Dull white to pale buff; rather heavily marked with brown. Two females sometimes lay eggs in one nest. Incubation is by female only; 21-24 days. Young: Downy young leave nest within a day after hatching; and follow parents. Both parents tend young and lead them to food sources; but young feed themselves. Young can fly short distances at age of 10 days but are not full grown until later. One brood per year; two in years with good food supply.,Mostly seeds; leaves; berries. Adults apparently are mostly vegetarians at most seasons. They eat many fresh plant shoots; leaves; and buds; especially during spring. Cactus fruits and the berries of mistletoe; hackberry; and other plants are eaten when available. Seeds are important in the diet at all times. Usually few insects are eaten; although young birds may eat more. ,In breeding season; male gives clear descending note from high perch. Mated pairs spend much time exploring territory; apparently prospecting for good nest sites. Nest site is usually on ground; in shade of shrub or grass clump; sometimes above ground on stump or on old nest of thrasher or roadrunner. Typical ground nest (probably built by female) is shallow depression lined with grass; leaves; twigs. 
Garganey,Spatula querquedula,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Gila-Woodpecker,Melanerpes uropygialis,Woodpeckers,Desert washes; saguaros; river groves; cottonwoods; towns. Generally in dry country; but requires suitable sites for nesting cavities: cottonwood groves along rivers; large mesquites or willows; palms; giant cactus such as saguaro or cardon. Readily adapts to suburbs of southwestern cities. Also dry tropical forest in Mexico.,Forages on tree trunks and cacti; in outer branches of trees or shrubs; or on ground. When seeking insects on tree trunks; generally probes or gleans at surface; rarely excavating for food. Often drinks sugar-water from hummingbird feeders.,3-4; up to 6. White. Incubation is by both sexes; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Age at which young leave nest not well known; probably about 4 weeks; accompany parents for some time thereafter. 2-3 broods per year.,Omnivorous. Diet includes wide variety of insects; also cactus fruit; other wild and cultivated fruit; berries of shrubs and mistletoe; nectar from flowers; seeds; small lizards; earthworms; eggs and sometimes young of smaller birds. ,Displays; used largely in aggression; include exaggerated bowing and head-swinging; accompanied by loud calls. Nest site is a cavity excavated in giant cactus or in tree (cottonwood; willow; or large mesquite); sometimes in palm trunk. Cavity usually 8-30' above ground. Both sexes take part in excavating. Cavity in giant cactus cannot be used for several months; as inner pulp of cactus must dry to solid casing around cavity; holes may be excavated one year; used the next. 
Gilded-Flicker,Colaptes chrysoides,Woodpeckers,Deserts; riverside groves. Common in Sonoran desert; where it nests in holes in giant saguaro cactus. Also found in groves of cottonwoods and other trees along rivers and streams at low elevations.,Forages by hopping on ground; climbing tree trunks and cacti; occasionally flying out to catch insects in the air.,Usually 4-5. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); about 11 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young leave nest about 4 weeks after hatching; are fed by parents at first; later following them to good foraging sites. Generally 1 brood per year.,Mostly ants and other insects. Unlike most birds (but like other flickers and several other woodpeckers); eats many ants. Also feeds on beetles; termites; caterpillars; and other insects. Eats many fruits and berries; and eats seeds and nuts at times. ,Males defend nesting territory with calling; drumming; and many aggressive displays; including swinging head back and forth; flicking wings open and spreading tail to show off bright underside. Courtship displays mostly similar. Nest site is cavity in giant cactus; tree; or post. Tree cavities usually in dead wood. Cavity excavated by both sexes; typically 6-20' above ground; sometimes higher. 
Glaucous-Gull,Larus hyperboreus,Gulls and Terns,Mainly coastal. At most seasons favors coastal bays and estuaries; but also occurs well offshore at times; small numbers may be found around large lakes well inland in winter. Nests on cliff ledges; islands; beaches.,Feeds as both a predator and a scavenger; also steals food from other birds. Forages while walking or swimming; in flight; may swoop down to pick items from surface of water; or may catch smaller birds in the air.,3; sometimes 2-4. Olive to buff; blotched with dark brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 27-28 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Downy young may leave nest a few days after hatching; but remain in general area. Age at first flight probably about 45-50 days; with young becoming independent soon thereafter.,Omnivorous. Diet highly variable; includes fish; mollusks; crustaceans; marine worms; sea urchins; insects; birds; eggs; berries; seaweed; carrion. Often scavenges refuse around towns; fishing boats. ,Breeds in colonies or in isolated pairs. Nest site is on cliff top; flat rocky ground; rocky outcrop; sometimes on ice or snow. Nest (built by both sexes) is a mound of grasses; moss; seaweed; and debris; with a shallow depression at the top. 
Glaucous-winged-Gull,Larus glaucescens,Gulls and Terns,Primarily coastal. Most common around bays; estuaries; beaches; rocky shorelines. Visits fresh ponds and garbage dumps near coast. Sometimes far offshore over continental shelf; well out of sight of land. Very rare around inland lakes and rivers. Nests mainly on low; flat islands.,Forages while walking or swimming; or may plunge into water from flight. May drop hard-shelled clams and crabs onto rocks while in flight to break them open. Associates with feeding bears and other predators to pick up scraps they leave behind.,2-3; sometimes 1-4. Olive to yellow-green; marked with scrawls and blotches of brown and gray. Incubation is by both sexes; 26-29 days. Young: Downy young may leave nest 2 days after hatching; remain in vicinity. Both parents feed young. Age at first flight 37-53 days after hatching; leave colony about 2 weeks later on average.,Omnivorous. Diet includes fish; limpets; chitons; clams; mussels; sea urchins; barnacles; crabs; squid. Also smaller birds; eggs; small mammals; some plant material. Scavenges refuse in garbage dumps; and eats carrion. ,First breeds at age of 4 years or older. Breeds in colonies; often densely packed. Nest site is on ground; sometimes on cliff or roof. Nest (built by both sexes) is a shallow scrape lined with grass; moss; seaweed; debris. Pair may begin building several nests; but complete only one. 
Glossy-Ibis,Plegadis falcinellus,Ibises and Spoonbills,Marshes; rice fields; swamps. Forages in shallow waters; favoring marshes (either fresh or salt); flooded fields; shallow ponds; estuaries. Nests in low stands of willows and other shrubs surrounded by marsh; on ground in spartina marsh; in dense thickets of trees and shrubs on higher ground; sometimes in mangroves.,Forages mostly by wading in shallow water; probing in soft mud for food. Also picks up insects and other visible items from surface of water or soil.,3-4; sometimes 1-5. Pale blue or green. Female does more of incubation than male: all night; part of day. Incubation period about 21 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. By age of 2-3 weeks; young may wander or climb about near nest. First attempt to fly at 4-5 weeks. At 6-7 weeks; young can fly well; may go to feeding areas with parents.,Mostly insects and crayfish. Feeds on beetle larvae in soft soil; also adults and larvae of many aquatic insects. Crayfish may be main food in some areas. In Florida; reported to eat many small snakes. Also may eat leeches; snails; crabs; frogs; small fish. ,Breeds in colonies; sometimes associated with other kinds of wading birds. Nest site is in shrubs or low trees over water or over land; or on ground on island. Nest (built by both sexes) is bulky platform of sticks and marsh plants; with a shallow depression at center. Adults may continue adding to nest throughout the period of incubating the eggs and feeding the young. 
Golden-Eagle,Aquila chrysaetos,Hawks and Eagles,Open mountains; foothills; plains; open country. Requires open terrain. In the north and west; found over tundra; prairie; rangeland; or desert; very wide-ranging in winter; more restricted to areas with good nest sites in summer. In forested eastern North America; often hunts over marshes or along rivers.,Searches for prey by soaring high or by flying low over slopes; also watches for prey from high perches. When prey is spotted; eagle plunges to capture it in talons. Members of a pair sometime hunt together; with the second bird capturing prey that evades the first.,2; sometimes 1-3; rarely 4. Whitish to buff; marked with brown. Sometimes one egg in the clutch is unmarked. Incubation is by both parents (female does more); 41-45 days. Young: Female remains with young most of the time at first; while male does most hunting; bringing prey to nest. After young are half-grown; female also does much hunting. Age of young at first flight roughly 60-70 days.,Mostly small mammals. Typically preys on mammals ranging in size from ground squirrels up to prairie-dogs; marmots; and jackrabbits. May take smaller rodents (voles and mice) or larger animals such as foxes; young pronghorns; or young deer on occasion. Also eats birds; mostly gamebirds such as grouse but rarely birds as large as cranes or as small as sparrows. Also some snakes; lizards; large insects. Will feed on carrion; including dead fish. ,May mate for life. In courtship; 2 birds circle high in air; making shallow dives at each other. Display to defend territory includes repeated high flight followed by steep dives; loops; rolls; and other acrobatics. Nest site is most often on cliff ledge; also frequently in large tree; rarely on ground. Sites may be used for many years. A pair may have 2 or more alternate nest sites; using them in different years. Nest (built by both sexes) a bulky platform of sticks; lined with weeds; grass; leaves; moss. New material added each year; and nest may become huge. 
Golden-cheeked-Warbler,Setophaga chrysoparia,Wood Warblers,Junipers; oaks; also streamside trees. Habitat specialist during the nesting season. Breeds on hillsides and slopes in mature woods of Ashe juniper; especially brakes of junipers 10-20' tall interspersed with deciduous trees such as oak; walnut; pecan; and hackberry. In winter in the tropics; found in mountain pine-oak forests.,During the breeding season; forages in the upper two-thirds of junipers and deciduous trees; apparently never on the ground. Most common method of feeding is gleaning insects in juniper foliage; hopping among the branches. Also makes short flights out to catch flying insects. Beats caterpillars on branch and removes moth wings before eating or feeding to young.,3-4; sometimes 5. White to creamy; with flecks of brown concentrated at large end. Incubation by female only; 12 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 9 days after hatching. Parents split up the fledglings; each adult caring for part of brood for 4-7 weeks. 1 brood per year.,Almost entirely insects. Feeds on caterpillars; green lacewings; small cicadas; beetles; ants; katydids; walking sticks; deer flies; crane flies; moths; aphids; true bugs; and others; also spiders. ,Males return to breeding grounds about middle of March. Females follow about 5 days later. Both sexes faithful to site; returning to previous year's breeding territory. In courtship; male fluffs feathers; and calls; occasionally displays by facing female and spreading wings. Nest: Female chooses site; usually in fork of juniper branches; sometimes in small oak; walnut; or pecan tree. Deep; compact; open cup nest; constructed by the female; always made of bark strips from the Ashe juniper. Also can include spiderweb; lichens; mosses; leaves; and grass. Nest lined with rootlets; feathers; and hair. 
Golden-crowned-Kinglet,Regulus satrapa,Kinglets,Mostly conifers; in winter; sometimes other trees. Breeds in dense coniferous forest; especially those of spruce; fir; and hemlock; less often in Douglas-fir or pines. In migration and winter may be found in deciduous trees; but tends to seek out conifers even then; including pine groves and exotic conifers planted in cemeteries and parks.,Forages very actively in trees and shrubs; mainly in conifers. Hops among branches; often hanging upside down from tips of twigs. Occasionally hovers to glean an insect from foliage or bark; rarely flies out to catch an insect in mid-air. Compared to Ruby-crowned Kinglet; does less hovering and flycatching; more hanging upside down.,8-9; sometimes 5-11. A surprising number of eggs for small size of bird; often arranged in 2 layers in nest. Eggs whitish to pale buff; with brown and gray spots often concentrated toward larger end. Incubation by female only; about 14-15 days. Male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 14-19 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of tiny insects; including small beetles; gnats; caterpillars; scale insects; aphids; and many others. Also eats spiders. Diet includes many eggs of insects and spiders. Will feed on oozing sap; rarely feeds on fruit. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing. In aggressive encounters with other males; he may lean far forward and down with crown feathers raised; wings and tail flicking while he sings. Nest: Placed in spruce or other conifer; 6-60' up but usually high; averaging about 50' above the ground. Nest is attached to hanging twigs below a horizontal branch; close to trunk; well protected by foliage above. Female builds deep hanging cup of moss; lichens; bark strips; spiderwebs; twigs; leaves; lined with feathers; plant down; rootlets; other soft materials. 
Golden-crowned-Sparrow,Zonotrichia atricapilla,New World Sparrows,Boreal scrub; spruce; in winter; forest edges; thickets; chaparral; gardens. Breeds in shrubby habitats of North and of high mountains; including willow thickets at edge of dry tundra; stunted spruce near treeline. Winters in many kinds of brushy habitats; from wild chaparral to parks and gardens. Winter habitat like that of White-crowned Sparrow; but tends to be in denser brush.,Forages mostly on the ground; under or near dense thickets. Sometimes feeds up in shrubs or low trees. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,3-5. Creamy white to pale greenish; heavily spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is probably by female; and probably lasts 11-12 days. Male may bring food to the female while she is incubating. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young probably leave nest at about 9 days.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet in winter is mostly seeds of weeds and grasses; also some other plant material such as buds; flowers; newly sprouted shoots; and berries. Also eats some insects and spiders; probably more so in summer. Young are probably fed mostly insects. ,Details of nesting behavior are not well known. Male sings from a prominent perch in summer to defend nesting territory. Nest site is usually on the ground; very well hidden under thickets of dwarf willow or other shrubs; typically placed in slight depression; so that rim of nest is nearly level with ground. Rarely placed a couple of feet up in a dense shrub. Nest is a bulky cup of grass; weeds; ferns; leaves; lined with fine grass and sometimes with animal hair. 
Golden-crowned-Warbler,Basileuterus culicivorus,Wood Warblers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Golden-fronted-Woodpecker,Melanerpes aurifrons,Woodpeckers,Mesquites; stream woodlands; groves. In its limited North American range; found in most open woodlands; especially along rivers; also around orchards; stands of mesquite along dry washes; groves of trees in open country. In Central America; also around edges of tropical forest.,Searches for insects on tree trunks and limbs; gleaning them from bark or probing below surface. Clambers about in branches of trees or shrubs to pick nuts; berries; or fruits. May forage on ground; and sometimes catches insects in flight. Cracks open mesquite pods to eat the seeds.,Usually 4-5; up to 7. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 30 days after hatching; may associate with parents for some time thereafter. 1-2 broods per year; rarely 3.,Omnivorous. Feeds on a wide variety of insects. Also eats nuts; berries; fruits; and seeds of many plants; will eat many acorns where they are available. ,Advertises nesting territory with loud calls; sometimes with drumming. Nest site is a cavity in trunk of tree (live or dead) such as mesquite or oak; or in telephone poles or fence posts. Cavities are usually fairly low; typically less than 20' above ground. Both sexes help excavate the cavity; which may be used for more than one season. 
Golden-winged-Warbler,Vermivora chrysoptera,Wood Warblers,Open woodlands; brushy clearings; undergrowth. Breeds in brushy areas with patches of weeds; shrubs; and scattered trees (such as alder or pine). This habitat type is found in places where a cleared field is growing up to woods again; as well as in marshes and tamarack bogs. In winter; in the tropics; lives in forest edges and open woodland.,Forages mostly in the upper level of trees and shrubs in summer. Feeds by probing and picking among foliage; sometimes hanging head downward. Probes in curled leaves and pries them open in search of insects. May forage with Black-capped Chickadees on breeding territories and in migration. On wintering ground; mainly feeds fairly low in trees; in mixed flocks with other species.,5; sometimes 4-7. Pale cream or pink with streaks and blotches of brown and lilac. Incubation by female; 10-11 days. Up to 30% of nests have cowbird eggs. Hatching of warbler eggs is low when cowbirds present; but cowbird nestlings do not necessarily fare better than the warbler nestlings. Young: Leave nest after 8-9 days; are fed by parents for up to another month. Parents may divide fledglings into two groups; each parent attending only part of brood. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; but feeds on many caterpillars and adult moths; especially Tortricid moths; also other insects and spiders. ,Hybridizes with Blue-winged Warbler. Male arrives on territory in May; a few days before the females. Male defends territory by singing; in aggressive encounters; he postures with raised crown feathers and spread tail; and he may chase and fight with other males. Males have two song types; one used to advertise territory and one mostly for attracting a mate. Courtship includes male chasing female; raising his crown feathers; slow wing beats as male flies away; and gliding flight as male flies toward female. Nest: Built by female on the ground at base of shrub or in a tussock of grass or sedge; usually hidden by foliage. Open cup nest constructed of leaves; grapevine bark; and long strips of grass; lined with fine plant material. 
Graces-Warbler,Setophaga graciae,Wood Warblers,Pine-oak forests of mountains. During the breeding season; found mainly in the tops of pines; sometimes also in spruce; fir; and oak thickets in higher mountains of the Southwest. In winter in Mexico; inhabits pine-oak woods in the mountains.,During the breeding season; often forages by flying out from the treetops to catch insects in mid-air. Also searches among branches and twigs and hovers briefly while picking insects from foliage; spending most of its time in the tops of the taller pine trees.,3-4. Creamy white; spotted with browns around larger end. Details and timing of incubation are not well known. Young: Nestlings are fed by female; probably by male as well. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known. Normally 2 broods per year.,Presumably mostly insects. Details of diet are not well known; undoubtedly eats mostly insects; like other warblers. ,Details of breeding behavior are not well known. In the Southwest; arrives on breeding grounds mostly in early April. Males defend nesting territories by singing. Nest: Placed on a horizontal branch or in the top crown of tree; usually pine; sometimes fir; 20-60' above the ground. Nest (built by female) is a tightly constructed open cup made of plant fibers; oak catkins; plant down; and webs of spiders and caterpillars; lined with animal hair and feathers. Nest is often well hidden among a cluster of pine needles. 
Grasshopper-Sparrow,Ammodramus savannarum,New World Sparrows,Grassland; hayfields; prairies. Breeds in rather dry fields and prairies; especially those with fairly tall grass and weeds and a few scattered shrubs. Also nests in overgrown pastures and hayfields; and sometimes in fields of other crops. In Florida; nests in prairie with scattered palmettos. During migration and winter; found in many types of open fields.,Forages while hopping or running on the ground; picking up items from the soil or from plant stems. Almost always forages alone.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Creamy white; spotted with reddish brown and gray. Incubation is by female only; about 11-12 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9 days after hatching; before they are able to fly well.,Mostly insects and seeds. In summer feeds mostly on insects; including many grasshoppers; also beetles; caterpillars; ants; true bugs; and many others. Also eats spiders; snails; centipedes; and earthworms. Seeds are also important in diet; probably more so in winter; including those of weeds and grasses as well as waste grain. ,May nest in small colonies; numbers in a given area often change markedly from year to year. Male sings from a low perch to defend territory; sometimes sings at night. In courtship; sometimes sings in flight. Nest site is on the ground; very well hidden at base of weed; shrub; or clump of grass. Often placed in slight depression; so that rim of nest is even with level of ground. Nest (probably built by female) is an open cup of dry grass; lined with fine grass; rootlets; sometimes animal hair. Usually has partly domed back and sides of grass woven into overhanging vegetation; leaving opening at front. 
Gray-Catbird,Dumetella carolinensis,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Undergrowth; brush; thorn scrub; suburban gardens. At all seasons; favors dense low growth. Most common in leafy thickets along the edges of woods and streams; shrubby swamps; overgrown brushy fields; and hedges in gardens. Avoids unbroken forest and coniferous woods.,Does much foraging on ground; flipping leaves aside with bill as it seeks insects. Feeds on berries up in shrubs and trees.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 2-6. Greenish blue; rarely with some red spots. Incubation is by female only; about 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10-11 days after hatching. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Especially in early summer; eats many beetles; ants; caterpillars; grasshoppers; crickets; true bugs; and other insects; as well as spiders and millipedes. Nestlings are fed almost entirely on insects. More than half the annual diet of adults may be vegetable matter; especially in fall and winter; when they eat many kinds of wild berries and some cultivated fruit. Rarely catches small fish. At feeders; will eat a bizarre assortment of items including doughnuts; cheese; boiled potato; and corn flakes. ,Early in breeding season; male sings constantly in morning and evening; sometimes at night. Courtship may involve male chasing female; posturing and bowing with wings drooped and tail raised; male may face away from female to show off patch of chestnut under tail. When Brown-headed Cowbirds lay eggs in nests of this species; the cowbird eggs are usually punctured and ejected by the adult Catbirds. Nest: Placed in dense shrubs; thickets; briar tangles; or low trees; usually 3-10' above the ground. Nest (built mostly by female) is a large bulky cup of twigs; weeds; grass; leaves; and sometimes pieces of trash; lined with rootlets and other fine materials. 
Gray-Flycatcher,Empidonax wrightii,Tyrant Flycatchers,Sagebrush; also pinyon and juniper. In winter; willows; brush. Breeds in open and rather arid habitats; especially sagebrush plains with a few taller trees or shrubs; also scrubby woods of juniper and pinyon pine. Winters in mesquite groves and in streamside willows and other trees; in lowlands.,Forages by watching for insects from an exposed perch; then flying out to catch them in bill. Typically perches low; and often flies down to ground for insects; also catches many insects in mid-air; and takes some from foliage and twigs while hovering.,3-4. Creamy white. Incubation is probably by female only; about 14 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest and make first flights about 16 days after hatching.,Insects. Diet not known in detail; but reported to feed only on insects; including beetles; wasps; moths; grasshoppers; and others. ,May sometimes nest in loose colonies in good habitat. In places; this species and Dusky Flycatcher overlap in nesting habitat; and they will defend territories against each other. Nest site is typically in vertical crotch of sagebrush or on horizontal branch of juniper or pinyon pine; 3-20' above the ground. Nest (built mostly by female; perhaps sometimes with help from male) is a deep cup; rather bulky and loosely constructed. Made of weeds; strips of bark; grasses; twigs; lined with plant down; fine bark fibers; animal fur; feathers. Nest is usually in dense part of plant and is not conspicuous. 
Gray-Hawk,Buteo plagiatus,Hawks and Eagles,Wooded lowland streams. In United States; breeds only in tall trees along or near permanent streams; especially in cottonwoods; with areas of dense brush (such as mesquite) nearby. In the tropics much more widespread; found in any kind of brushy or semi-open habitat.,Surprisingly agile in flight; able to fly rapidly among tree limbs and dense brush; using its talons to pick off lizards or birds from the branches. May watch for prey from a perch; or may circle low over clearings or through the woods.,Usually 2-3. Pale bluish-white; fading to white; sometimes with a few brown spots. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 32 days. Young: Apparently both parents bring food for young birds. Young may leave nest at about 6 weeks; but may return to nest for resting or sleeping for some time thereafter.,Mostly lizards and birds. In Arizona; feeds heavily on spiny lizards (genus Sceloporus) that climb in trees; also other lizards; various small and medium-sized birds; snakes; mice; wood rats; small rabbits; ground squirrels; large insects. Diet in tropics not well known but apparently similar. ,In courtship; pairs circle high in air; calling. Male may climb high; dive steeply; then repeat; in impressive aerial display. At times both members of pair may fly high and then dive. Adults have loud whistling call; somewhat like cry of Peacock; given near nest. Nest: In Arizona; nest site is in tall tree; usually in cottonwood but sometimes in sycamore; oak; or other species. Site is usually well hidden near top of tree; 40-60' up; to over 100' at times. Nest is a small platform of sticks; including green leafy twigs; lined with leaves. 
Gray-Kingbird,Tyrannus dominicensis,Tyrant Flycatchers,Roadsides; mangroves; edges. In Florida; breeds in a variety of habitats; from undisturbed mangrove swamps to centers of cities near coast; also in farmland and vacant lots. In the Caribbean; found in a similarly wide range of wooded and open habitats.,Forages by watching from an exposed perch and then flying out to catch insects in the air. May also hover and take insects or other items from foliage; and sometimes catches prey just above (or at) the surface of the water.,3-4; rarely 5. Pale pink to buff; blotched with brown; lavender; and gray. Details of incubation not well known. Young: Evidently both parents bring food for the nestlings. Development of young and age at first flight are not well known.,Mostly insects; some berries. Feeds on a variety of insects; including beetles; wasps; bees; and many others; with some as large as dragonflies. Also eats small lizards; and has been seen catching hummingbirds in the Caribbean. At some seasons; berries and small fruits may be more than one-fifth of the diet. ,Nesting behavior is poorly known. Adults are very active and bold in defense of their nest; even attacking humans who come too close. Nest site is often among branches of coastal mangroves; 4-12' above the water or ground. Also nests in taller trees inland; such as pines or oaks; up to 40' above the ground. In cities; may build nest where wires cross utility poles. Nest is a cup of twigs; grasses; rootlets; lined with finer grass; usually built loosely; so that eggs may even be visible from below. 
Gray-Partridge,Perdix perdix,Pheasants and Grouse,Cultivated land; hedgerows; bushy pastures; meadows. Mostly lives in grasslands and agricultural fields. Farmland is excellent habitat as long as hedgerows and shelterbelts are left between fields. In winter often in stubble fields; moving into edges of woodlots in harsh weather.,Forages in coveys most of year; alone or in pairs in spring. Takes most food from ground. In winter; may burrow into snow to reach seeds on ground.,Usually 12-18; sometimes up to 22 or more; sometimes fewer than 10. Fewer eggs in later clutches. Eggs buff; brown; or olive. Incubation begins after last egg is laid; until that time; eggs are covered with grass and weeds when female is away from nest. Incubation is by female only; 21-26 days; usually 25. Young: All eggs usually hatch on same day; and downy young leave nest together with parents. Both parents tend young and may lead them directly to food; but young feed themselves. Young can make short flights at less than 2 weeks; may be full-grown at 3-4 months; remain with parents through first winter.,Mostly seeds; also leaves and insects. Eats seeds from a wide variety of plants; including many grasses and weeds; also waste grain from crops such as wheat; oats; corn; sunflower. Seeds are most of diet in fall and winter; eats more green leaves in spring; insects in summer. Young chicks eat mostly insects. ,In courtship; male stands upright; flicks tail up and down; puffs out chest feathers to display dark belly patch and barred flanks; female approaches with bobbing movements of head. Nest site is on ground among dense cover; sometimes in open field but more often under hedgerow or shelterbelt or on brushy roadside. Nest (built by female; with male keeping watch nearby) is a shallow scrape lined with grass; leaves. 
Gray-Vireo,Vireo vicinior,Vireos,Brushy mountain slopes; mesas; open chaparral; scrub oak; junipers. Breeds in dry thorn scrub; chaparral; pinyon-juniper and oak-juniper scrub; or sagebrush and mesquites of arid foothills and mesas; between 3;000-6;500' elevation. In winter; in northwest Mexico; found near coast in dry thorn scrub of elephant trees and giant cacti.,Usually forages within 5' of the ground; moving about actively in brush on dry slopes. Also does some foraging on the ground. In winter; individuals defend feeding territories; driving away others of their own kind.,4; sometimes 3-5. Pinkish-white with brown specks scattered near large end. Incubation is by both parents; 13-14 days. Cowbirds frequently lay eggs in nests of this species. Gray Vireos will sometimes deal with such parasitism by constructing second floor of nest over cowbird eggs. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest 13-14 days after hatching. 2 broods per year.,Insects and fruits. During the breeding season; feeds mostly on insects; including beetles; caterpillars; small moths; bugs; treehoppers; tree crickets; dobsonflies; cicadas; grasshoppers; and many others. In winter; eats many berries; especially those of elephant trees; in addition to insects. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing through much of breeding season. Nest: Placed in shrub; frequently oak or juniper; 1-12' from ground; but most commonly 2-8' up. Nest is supported by the rim woven onto a horizontal forked twig. Nest (built by both sexes) is a deep; rounded cup made of weeds; shreds of bark; grass stems; leaves; and plant fibers; bound with spiderwebs; and lined with fine grass. 
Gray-cheeked-Thrush,Catharus minimus,Thrushes,Boreal forest; tundra scrub; in migration; other woodlands. Breeds in northern spruce forest; often rather open and stunted; and north of treeline in thickets of willow and alder on tundra. Winters in tropical forest.,Forages mostly on the ground; hopping about under cover of dense thickets. Sometimes seen feeding on berries up in shrubs or trees.,4; sometimes 3-5; perhaps rarely 6. Pale blue; with vague brown spots; sometimes almost unmarked. Incubation is by female; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 11-13 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and berries. Diet through the year is not known in detail. In North America; feeds on a variety of insects; including beetles; caterpillars; ants; wasps; fly larvae; and many others; also spiders and some other invertebrates. Also eats many berries and wild fruits. Winter diet in tropics poorly known. ,Male arrives first on breeding grounds and establishes territory; defending it by singing. In courtship; male pursues female in swift flight among the trees. Nest: Often placed very low or even on the ground; usually less than 10' up; sometimes up to 24'. Ground nests are often among bases of willow or alder shoots; while higher nests may be against trunk of conifer at base of branches. Nest (built by female) is a well-made open cup of grass; moss; twigs; weeds; strips of bark; sometimes with some mud added; lined with fine grass and rootlets. 
Gray-crowned-Rosy-Finch,Leucosticte tephrocotis,Finches,Barren tundra; alpine snowfields; rocky islands (off Alaska); winters in open country. Breeds in barren rocky tundra of high mountains and of Alaskan islands; mountain birds often are associated with snowfields. Winters in similar habitats; also in mountain valleys; open plains; towns.,Forages mostly on ground or on snow. Sometimes flies up to catch insects in mid-air.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. May tend to lay more eggs in some Alaskan populations. Eggs white; rarely with a few reddish brown dots. Incubation is by female only; probably about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young probably leave the nest about 14-15 days after hatching; but this may vary among populations. 1 brood per year in mountains; often 2 among Alaskan island birds.,Mostly seeds and insects. Feeds mainly on seeds of grasses and weeds; especially in winter; when these may make up virtually entire diet. Also eats some buds and leaves; and eats many insects in summer. Young are fed mostly insects. Will eat salt. ,One courtship display may involve male facing female; half-spreading and lowering his wings; and then raising and lowering them slowly. Nest: Typically placed in a niche among boulders; under a rock; or in a crevice in a cliff; sometimes in a hole in a building. Nest (built by female) is a rather bulky cup of grass; rootlets; lichens; moss; lined with fine grass and sometimes with feathers and animal hair. 
Gray-crowned-Yellowthroat,Geothlypis poliocephala,Wood Warblers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Gray-headed-Chickadee,Poecile cinctus,Chickadees and Titmice,Streamside thickets; spruce forest. In North America; found very locally in stunted spruce forest of far north; close to treeline. Perhaps mainly where narrow strips of spruce and groves of willows grow along streams through generally barren country. Similar habitats in northern Eurasia; but more widespread.,Forages in small flocks or family groups; moving actively from tree to tree. May prefer feeding in conifers at most seasons. Forages by clambering about in branches and twigs and on trunk; hanging upside down to examine undersides of twigs. Sometimes feeds on ground. At least in northern Europe; often stores food; retrieving it later.,6-10; sometimes 4-15. White; finely spotted with reddish brown; with some pale spots of olive-brown or gray. Incubation is by female; 14-18 days. Young: Female broods young most of time at first; while male brings food; later; both parents bring food. Young leave nest at about 19-20 days.,Mostly insects and seeds. Diet in North America poorly known. Feeds on insects; including caterpillars; flies; beetles; and the eggs and pupae of many insects; as well as spiders. Also probably eats seeds of many conifers. Has been seen feeding on carcass of dead caribou in winter. ,Nesting behavior in North America very poorly known; most details given here are from Europe. Members of pair remain together throughout year on permanent territory. This territory may be quite large; and may be shared by 2 pairs. Male feeds female from before egg-laying until nestlings are about half-grown. Nest site is in hole in tree; either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; usually low (1-15' above the ground). May clean out cavity before starting nest building. Nest (built by female) has foundation of decaying wood; then layer of grass or moss; then cup of animal hair. 
Gray-headed-Swamphen,Porphyrio poliocephalus,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Shallow freshwater wetlands; including marshes; ponds; and flooded fields. Also will forage in open grassy areas near water; such as lawns and golf courses. ,Forages mostly by wading along shorelines or in shallow marshes or wet fields; sometimes by climbing about in marsh vegetation; occasionally while swimming. Often stands on one foot and uses other foot to grasp plant stems and pull them up to beak.,Each breeding female lays 3-7 eggs; but multiple females may lay in same nest. Eggs are tan or buff with darker brown spots. Incubation is by both sexes; and probably takes about 3 weeks. Young: Fed by adults at first. May start to find some of their own food within a few days after hatching; but adults continue to feed them for several weeks. ,Mostly plant material; including stalks; roots; leaves; and seeds of aquatic plants; especially spikerush in Florida. Also eats some insects; frogs; snails; and other small creatures; or scavenges food scraps left by humans.,NA
Gray-tailed-Tattler,Tringa brevipes,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Great-Black-backed-Gull,Larus marinus,Gulls and Terns,Mainly coastal waters; estuaries; a few on large lakes. Close to coast at most seasons; but will forage far offshore in winter over the continental shelf. Some regularly move inland along St. Lawrence River to Great Lakes; rarely other fresh waters. Nests mostly on islands; tops of sea cliffs; sometimes on mainland beaches and marsh edges.,Opportunistic. Forages on foot; while flying; or while swimming. May steal food from other birds. May break open hard-shelled mollusks and eggs by flying high and dropping them on rocks. Often scavenges on refuse around fishing boats; docks; garbage dumps.,2-3; sometimes 1-5. Olive to buff with brown blotches. Incubation is by both sexes; 27-28 days. Young: Both parents care for and feed young. Downy young may wander from nest after a few days; but remain in general area. Young are capable of flight at 7-8 weeks after hatching; become independent soon thereafter.,Omnivorous. Diet includes carrion; fish; mollusks; crustaceans; marine worms; insects; rodents; berries; and the adults; young; and eggs of other birds. ,Usually first breeds at age of 4-5 years. Generally nests in colonies; often mixed with Herring Gulls or other birds; sometimes nests in isolated pairs. Nest site is on ground; often on top of or beside a rocky outcropping. Nest (built by both sexes) is mound of grass; seaweed; moss; debris; with shallow depression in center. 
Great-Blue-Heron,Ardea herodias,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Marshes; swamps; shores; tideflats. Very adaptable. Forages in any kind of calm fresh waters or slow-moving rivers; also in shallow coastal bays. Nests in trees or shrubs near water; sometimes on ground in areas free of predators. "Great White" form is mostly in salt water habitats.,Forages mostly by standing still or walking very slowly in shallow water; waiting for fish to swim near; then striking with rapid thrust of bill. Also forages on shore; from floating objects; and in grassland. May hunt by day or night.,3-5; sometimes 2-7. Pale blue. Incubation is by both sexes; 25-30 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young capable of flight at about 60 days; depart nest at about 65-90 days. 1 brood per year in north; sometimes 2 in south.,Highly variable and adaptable. Eats mostly fish; but also frogs; salamanders; turtles; snakes; insects; rodents; birds. Has been seen stalking voles and gophers in fields; capturing rails at edge of marsh; eating many species of small waterbirds. ,Breeds in colonies; often of this species alone; sometimes mixed with other wading birds; rarely in isolated pairs. Male chooses nest site and displays there to attract mate. Displays include stretching neck up with bill pointing skyward; flying in circles above colony with neck extended; stretching neck forward with head and neck feathers erected and then snapping bill shut. Nest:  Site highly variable; usually in trees 20-60' above ground or water; sometimes in low shrubs; sometimes on ground (on predator-free islands); sometimes well above 100' in tree. Nest (built mostly by female; with material gathered mostly by male) is a platform of sticks; sometimes quite large. 
Great-Cormorant,Phalacrocorax carbo,Cormorants,Sea cliffs (nesting); mainly coastal. In North America mostly over shallow waters close to shore; especially in sheltered bays; rarely well out to sea. Nests on rocky cliffs of coasts and islands. Southerly wintering birds often around rock jetties. In recent years; as population has increased; has been found in winter on large rivers inland. In Old World regularly far inland on lakes; rivers; swamps.,See family introduction. Most foraging is within 10' of surface; although can dive to 30'.,3-5; rarely 1-6. Pale blue-green; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; 28-31 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Age at first flight about 50 days; young may return to nest to be fed for another 40-50 days.,Fish. Feeds almost entirely on fish; with small numbers of crustaceans; marine worms. In Old World; where found also on fresh water; diet may be more varied. ,Usually first breeds at age of 4-5 years. Breeds in colonies. Male chooses nest site; and displays to attract female by waving wings up and down; flashing white rump patches. Pairs at nest display by writhing and intertwining necks. Nest:  Site is usually on sheltered ledge of cliff; from just above water to 300' or higher. Rarely nests in trees in North America (but does so commonly in Old World). Nest is a pile of sticks; seaweed; debris; lined with finer materials. Female does most building; with material brought by male. 
Great-Crested-Flycatcher,Myiarchus crinitus,Tyrant Flycatchers,Woodlands; groves. Breeds mainly in deciduous forest or mixed forest; but avoids pure stands of conifers. May be found in either continuous deep forest or in more open wooded areas; around edges of clearings or abandoned orchards. Winters in the tropics mostly around edges of forest or second growth.,Forages by flying out from a perch to catch insects. May hover momentarily while taking insects from foliage or twigs; or may catch them in mid-air. Sometimes drops down to take food from on or near the ground; but usually feeds rather high.,5; sometimes 4-6; rarely more. Creamy white to pale buff; marked with brown; olive; lavender. Incubation is by female only; about 13-15 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 12-18 days.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including caterpillars; moths; butterflies; katydids; tree crickets; beetles; true bugs; and others. Also eats spiders and sometimes small lizards; and regularly eats fruits and berries. Small fruits may be a major part of diet in winter in the tropics. ,Male defends nesting territory with loud calls; sometimes by fighting with other males. Courtship may involve male chasing female among the trees. Nest site is usually in hole in tree; either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; usually 20-50' above the ground. Sometimes nests in artificial sites such as birdhouses; drainpipes; or hollow fence posts. Both sexes help build nest; in deep cavities; they may carry in large amounts of material; to bring the nest level up close to the entrance. Nest foundation is made of grass; weeds; strips of bark; rootlets; feathers; or other debris; lined with finer materials. Usually includes a piece of snakeskin in lining (or sometimes a piece of clear plastic instead). 
Great-Egret,Ardea alba,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Marshes; ponds; shores; mud flats. Usually forages in rather open situations; as along edges of lakes; large marshes; shallow coastal lagoons and estuaries; also along rivers in wooded country. Usually nests in trees or shrubs near water; sometimes in thickets some distance from water; sometimes low in marsh.,Forages mostly by standing or walking in shallow water; waiting for fish to come near; then catching them with rapid thrust of bill. May feed in flocks or in association with other herons; cormorants; ibises; sometimes stealing food from smaller birds. Also forages in open fields; sometimes around cattle.,3-4; sometimes 1-6. Pale blue-green. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-26 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young may clamber out of nest at 3 weeks; able to fly at 6-7 weeks.,Mostly fish. Aside from fish; also eats crustaceans; frogs; salamanders; snakes; aquatic insects. In open fields may catch grasshoppers; rodents. Has been seen catching small rails and other birds. ,Probably first breeds at age of 2-3 years. Sometimes nests in isolated pairs; usually in colonies; often mixed with other wading birds; cormorants; Anhingas. In mixed colonies; Great Egrets tend to nest high. Male selects nest area and displays there; at first driving away all other birds; later courting females. Courtship displays include calling; circular display flight; stretching neck up with bill pointed skyward. Nest:  Site is in tree or shrub; usually 10-40' above ground or water; sometimes very low in thicket or marsh; sometimes up to 90' high in tall cypress. Nest (built by both sexes) a platform of sticks; sometimes substantial. 
Great-Gray-Owl,Strix nebulosa,Superb Owls,Dense conifer forests; adjacent meadows; bogs. Generally favors country with mix of dense forest for nesting and roosting; and open areas for hunting. In the north; mostly around bogs; clearings; and burns in extensive coniferous woods; in the west; mostly around meadows in mountain forest.,May hunt by day or night. In summer; daytime feeding is usually near dawn or dusk. Usually hunts by listening and watching from a perch; swooping down when it locates prey; sometimes hunts by flying low over open areas. Can locate prey by sound; and will plunge into snow to catch rodents more than a foot below the surface.,2-5. White. At times; may lay more eggs in years when food is abundant. Incubation is by female only; 28-36 days. Male brings food to incubating female on nest.   Young: Female broods young for first 2-3 weeks. Male brings food to nest; and female feeds it to young. Young may climb out of nest and perch in nest tree or nearby trees after 3-4 weeks; are able to fly 1-2 weeks later. In some areas; adult female departs after young fledge; while male remains with them and feeds them for up to 3 months.,Mostly small mammals. Feeds mainly on voles in many northern areas; in western United States; pocket gophers may be main prey. Also eats mice; shrews; squirrels; weasels; small birds; rarely frogs. ,In courtship; male may feed female; members of pair preen each others' feathers. Nest: Usually uses old abandoned nest of other large bird; such as goshawk; raven; Osprey; sometimes nests on top of broken-off snag or stump; rarely on the ground. Site usually 10-50' above ground. A pair may reuse the same nest for several years. 
Great-Horned-Owl,Bubo virginianus,Superb Owls,Forests; woodlots; streamsides; open country. Found in practically all habitats in North America; from swamps to deserts to northern coniferous forest near treeline. In breeding season avoids tundra and unbroken grassland; since it requires some trees or heavy brush for cover.,Hunts mostly at night; sometimes at dusk. Watches from high perch; then swoops down to capture prey in its talons. Has extremely good hearing and good vision in low light conditions. In north in winter; may store uneaten prey; coming back later to thaw out frozen carcass by "incubating" it.,2-3; sometimes 1-5; rarely 6. Dull whitish. Incubation mostly by female; 28-35 days. Young: Both parents take part in providing food for young owls. Young may leave nest and climb on nearby branches at 5 weeks; can fly at about 9-10 weeks; tended and fed by parents for up to several months.,Varied; mostly mammals and birds. Mammals make up majority of diet in most regions. Takes many rats; mice; and rabbits; also ground squirrels; opossums; skunks; many others. Eats some birds (especially in north); up to size of geese; ducks; hawks; and smaller owls. Also eats snakes; lizards; frogs; insects; scorpions; rarely fish. ,May begin nesting very early in north (late winter); possibly so that young will have time to learn hunting skills before next winter begins. In courtship; male performs display flight; also feeds female. Nest: Typically uses old nest of other large bird; such as hawk; eagle; crow; heron; usually 20-60' above ground; also may nest on cliff ledge; in cave; in broken-off tree stump; sometimes on ground. Adds little or no nest material; aside from feathers at times. 
Great-Kiskadee,Pitangus sulphuratus,Tyrant Flycatchers,Streamside thickets; groves; orchards; towns. In its limited Texas range; found most commonly in open woodlands near water; but may occur in any habitat with good-sized trees. In the tropics; occurs widely in many semi-open habitats; usually avoiding dense unbroken forest.,Forages in various ways. Often flies out from a perch to catch flying insects in the air. Will perch on branch low over water and then plunge into water for fish; tadpoles; or insects. Often hops about in trees and shrubs to eat berries.,4; sometimes 2-5. Creamy white; dotted with dark brown and lavender. Details of incubation are not well known. Young: Apparently both adults help to feed the young in the nest. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Omnivorous. Feeds mostly on large insects; such as beetles; wasps; grasshoppers; bees; and moths; but also eats lizards; mice; baby birds; frogs; tadpoles; and small fish. Also eats many berries and small fruits; and some seeds. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Both members of pair actively defend nesting territory against intruders of their own species; and are quick to mob any predators that come close. Nest site is usually among dense branches of a tree or large shrub; 6-50' above the ground; usually 10-20' up. Nest is a large bulky structure; more or less round; with the entrance on the side. Nest is built of grass; weeds; strips of bark; Spanish moss; and other plant fibers; and lined with fine grasses. 
Great-Shearwater,Ardenna gravis,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Favors cold waters at all seasons; moving rapidly across tropical zones during migration only. Tends to occur over colder waters than Cory's Shearwater. Perhaps most common over outer part of continental shelf; avoiding mid-ocean and areas near shore. Nests on hilly islands with soil suitable for nesting burrows.,Forages by plunging into water from the air; by diving from surface and swimming underwater; or by seizing items while swimming on the surface. Prey caught underwater is brought to surface and swallowed. May feed in association with whales and dolphins. Typically feeds by day but apparently also at dusk and at night.,One. White. Incubation is probably by both sexes; estimated at 55 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; visiting at night. Age at first flight is reportedly about 84 days.,Mostly fish and squid. Feeds mainly on small fish and squid that swim in schools near surface; also eats crustaceans; and scavenges offal from fishing boats. ,Breeds mainly on Gough Island and islands in Tristan da Cunha group in South Atlantic. Arrives at colonies in September; most eggs laid in November; most young leave colony in May. Activity at colony is mainly at night. Courtship display includes pair sitting close together on ground; calling loudly and nibbling at each others' nape feathers. Nest:  Site is in burrow; sharply angled and about three feet long; sometimes in crevice among rocks. Nest chamber at end of burrow lined with grass. 
Great-Skua,Stercorarius skua,Skuas and Jaegers,Open ocean. Except during breeding season; usually far offshore; out of sight of land. With wide range at sea; occurs over cold and warm waters; from subarctic to equatorial regions. Nests mainly on treeless northern islands with low vegetation; close to colonies of other seabirds.,Forages in flight by dipping to surface of water; or by picking up items while swimming; scavenges on land; and catches smaller birds in the air. Often harasses other birds; forcing them to drop their food.,2; rarely one. Brownish to olive or pale blue; usually with dark brown spots around larger end. Incubation is by both sexes; 26-32 days. Young: May leave nest shortly after hatching; but remain in vicinity. Female stays with young most of time; while male brings back food to feed them by regurgitation. Young capable of flight about 40-50 days after hatching; may become independent soon thereafter; or not for almost 3 weeks.,Mainly fish; birds; carrion. At sea eats mostly fish; particularly species like sand lance which gather in dense schools. Around breeding colonies often preys heavily on smaller seabirds; including kittiwakes and puffins; and eats eggs and chicks of many species. Also eats carrion; insects; and small mammals up to size of rabbits. ,Usually first breeds at age of 7-8 years. Nests in loose colonies. Pair formation occurs in neutral social areas within or near colony; with much posturing and calling. Nest site is on ground; in open area. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow depression lined with bits of plant material. In aggressive display near nest; both wings are raised together over back; head extended forward while bird gives harsh calls. 
Great-tailed-Grackle,Quiscalus mexicanus,Blackbirds and Orioles,Groves; thickets; farms; towns; city parks. Found in many kinds of open and semi-open country; mostly in the lowlands; including farmland; marshes; irrigated fields; suburban lawns; brushy areas. Avoids true desert situations but may be common around streams or ponds in dry country.,Forages mostly on the ground; or by wading in very shallow water. Also forages in trees and shrubs; especially searching for nests to rob. Generally feeds in flocks.,3-4; sometimes 5. Pale greenish blue; irregularly marked with brown; gray; and black. Incubation is by female only; about 13-14 days. Young: Fed by female only. Young leave the nest about 3 weeks after hatching.,Omnivorous. Diet is extremely varied; includes many insects; also spiders; millipedes; snails; crayfish; tadpoles; small fish; lizards; eggs and nestlings of other birds; and sometimes adult birds. Also eats a wide variety of seeds; waste grain; berries; fruit; and nuts. ,Nests in colonies; from a few pairs to hundreds at times. In courtship and territorial display; male perches in the open; fluffs out feathers; partly spreads wings and tail; rapidly flutters wings while making harsh calls. Also postures with bill pointed straight up; mainly as a threat display to other birds. Both males and females may have more than one mate. Nest site varies; usually in dense vegetation near water; including dense shrubs or low trees; but also in marsh or in tall trees. Often 2-20' above ground or water; but can be as high as 50'. Nest (built by female) is a bulky open cup made of twigs; grass; weeds; cattails; rushes; whatever materials are readily available; lined with fine grass. Mud or manure often added to base of nest. Females may steal nest material from each other. 
Greater-Pewee,Contopus pertinax,Tyrant Flycatchers,Pine and pine-oak forests of mountains; canyons. Breeds in relatively open forest with tall pines and scattered understory (often of oaks). Also in sycamores and other trees along canyons through pine-oak woods. The few that winter in the United States are in groves or woodlots in the lowlands.,Forages mostly by watching from a perch within a tree; especially an open tree such as a pine; choosing perches at most levels but usually fairly high. Flies out to capture flying insects in mid-air. Apparently has very good eyesight; sometimes flying out after insects up to 50' away from its perch.,3-4. Dull white to creamy-white; lightly marked with brown and gray; mostly near larger end. Details of incubation not well known. Young: Probably fed by both parents. Age of young at first flight not well known.,Insects. Diet is not known in detail; undoubtedly includes a wide variety of flying insects. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Both members of pair are quick to attack jays or other potential nest predators that come near nest tree. Some observers have reported that smaller birds (such as warblers and vireos) prefer to nest near the Greater Pewee to gain protection from predators. Nest site is at fork in horizontal branch of pine; sycamore; oak; or other tall tree; usually 10-40' above the ground. Nest (probably built by female) is a well-built cup of grass; weeds; leaves; and other plant fibers; often held to the branch with spiderwebs. Inside of nest is lined with fine grasses; and outside is camouflaged with lichens. From the ground; nest may look like a lichen-covered bump on the branch. 
Greater-Prairie-Chicken,Tympanuchus cupido,Pheasants and Grouse,Native tall-grass prairie. Prime original habitat apparently was where prairie was intermixed with oak woodland. Currently found in areas of tall-grass prairie (especially native prairie; now a rare type); including places where such habitat is interspersed with agricultural fields.,Forages mostly on the ground; occasionally in trees. Most feeding in early morning and evening.,Usually 10-12; sometimes 7-17. Olive to pale buff; speckled with dark brown. Incubation is by female only; 23-25 days. Young: Follow female away from nest shortly after hatching. Young find all their own food. Can make short flights at about 2 weeks; stronger flights at 3 weeks. Young usually remain with female for almost 3 months.,Mostly seeds; leaves; insects. Winter diet is mostly leaves and seeds; also waste grain in agricultural fields. Historically; may have eaten many acorns in winter; and still may do so where they are available. In summer eats a variety of leaves; buds; seeds; berries; and insects. Young birds eat more insects. ,In spring; males gather on "booming grounds" and display there to attract females. Booming ground often on low hill; with good visibility; typically 8-20 males present; exceptionally up to 70. In display; male lowers head and raises tail; inflates air sacs on neck; raises feather tufts; stamps feet rapidly while making hollow moaning sounds; may leap in the air with loud cackles. Female visits booming ground; mates with one of the males. Nest site is on ground; among thick tall grass. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression lined with grass; leaves; feathers. 
Greater-Roadrunner,Geococcyx californianus,Cuckoos; Roadrunners; Anis,Deserts; open country with scattered brush. Most common in Sonoran desert and in other kinds of brushy country; including chaparral and Texas brushlands; in areas with a mix of open ground and dense low cover. At limits of range; found in dry grassland; forest edges; and limestone hills with scattered junipers.,Usually hunts by walking rapidly; looking for prey; then making very rapid dash forward to catch prey in its bill. May leap straight up from ground to catch insects or birds flying over (has been seen catching hummingbirds this way).,3-5; sometimes 2-6. White to pale yellowish. Incubation is by both parents (male does more); about 20 days. Young: Fed by both parents; leave the nest after about 18-21 days. May begin catching own food soon after leaving nest; but still fed by parents up to another 30-40 days.,Includes insects; reptiles; rodents; birds. Feeds on many large insects; plus other arthropods including scorpions; tarantulas; and centipedes. Also catches many lizards; snakes; mice; young ground squirrels; small birds (including baby quail and adult sparrows); sometimes snails. Eats some fruits (especially cactus fruit) and seeds. ,May mate for life; pairs defending territory all year. Courtship includes chases on foot; with frequent pauses to rest. One bird (either sex) approaches the other with stick or blade of grass; and drops it on the ground or gives it to other bird. In other displays; male runs away from female with tail and wings raised over back; gradually lowers wings; male wags tail from side to side while slowly bowing. Nest site is in dense bush; low tree; or cactus; usually 2-12' above ground; rarely on ground. Nest is platform of sticks; lined with grass; leaves; feathers; sometimes with snakeskin or pieces of cow manure. 
Greater-Sage-Grouse,Centrocercus urophasianus,Pheasants and Grouse,Sagebrush plains; also foothills and mountain slopes where sagebrush grows. Found on open plains; high valleys; rocky mesas; mountainsides; but only in vicinity of sagebrush. Prime nesting habitat includes some lower wet areas where young can forage for insects. In very dry country; may fly several miles to a source of water in morning and evening.,Forages by walking on ground; browsing leaves and other plant parts; or picking up items from ground.,Usually 7-9; sometimes 6-13. Olive-buff; evenly dotted with brown. Incubation is by female only; 25-27 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Young are tended by female; but feed themselves. Able to make short flights at age of 1-2 weeks; but do not reach adult size until much later.,Mostly sage leaves and buds; also insects. Diet in fall and winter may be almost entirely the leaves and fresh shoots of sagebrush. At other seasons; also eats leaves; flowers; and buds of a wide variety of plants; also some insects in summer (young eat many insects at first). Unlike most grouse; digestive system is not adapted for digesting hard seeds. ,Traditional display grounds may be used for years. In courtship display; male puffs out white chest; inflates two yellow air sacs; raises and spreads tail; droops wings; head is thrown back on shoulders as air sacs are deflated with loud popping sound. Females visit display ground to mate with one of the males. Oldest and most experienced males compete for positions at center of display ground; and these males are usually chosen by females. Nest site is on ground; under sagebrush or clump of grass. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression; sparsely lined with plant material. 
Greater-Scaup,Aythya marila,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; rivers; salt bays; estuaries. In summer on lakes and bogs in semi-open country near northern limits of boreal forest; and out onto tundra. In winter mainly on coastal bays; lagoons; estuaries; some on lakes inland. Overlaps with Lesser Scaup at all seasons; but in winter the Greater tends to be on more open bays; more exposed situations.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; large food items brought to surface to be eaten. Occasionally forages by dabbling or up-ending in shallow water. May feed at any time of day; or at night; with timing affected by tides in coastal regions.,7-9; sometimes 5-11. Olive buff. Incubation is by female only; 24-28 days. Young: female leads young to water shortly after hatching; 2 or more broods may join; tended by 1 or more females. Young feed themselves; are capable of flight 40-45 days after hatching.,Mostly mollusks and plant material. Diet in winter is mainly mussels; clams; oysters; snails; and other mollusks. In summer (and perhaps in winter on fresh water) consumes plants including pondweeds; wild celery; sedges; grasses; and others; also insects and crustaceans. ,Pair formation occurs mostly in late winter and early spring. Several males may court one female. Display elements of the males include throwing the head back sharply while giving a soft call; exaggerated bowing movements; with bill tip lowered to water and then raised high; flicking wings and tail while giving soft whistled notes. Nest site usually very close to water on island; shoreline; or mats of floating vegetation. Nest is a shallow depression; lined with dead plant material and with down. Female chooses nest site and builds nest. Several nests may be close together in loose colony. 
Greater-White-fronted-Goose,Anser albifrons,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; prairies; fields; lakes; bays; tundra in summer. Generally in open country; most spend winter where agricultural fields (for foraging) are close to extensive shallow waters (for roosting). Breeds on tundra; both wet coastal areas and drier inland tundra. "Tule Goose" breeds in wet open sloughs and bogs in spruce forest region; winters mainly in marshes.,Forages while walking on land by grazing and picking up items from ground. In water; submerges head and neck; or upends with tail up and head straight down.,3-6; sometimes 1-8. Dull white; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by female only; 22-27 days. Young: Can walk and swim well shortly after hatching. Both parents tend young; leading them to feeding areas; young feed themselves. Age at first flight 38-45 days. Young remain with parents for first year of life and often are loosely associated with them for several years.,Mostly plant material. In winter; mostly eats seeds and waste grain in fields; also grazes on new growth. In summer; eats stems and roots of grasses; sedges; horsetail; and other plants; also berries and buds. Eats a few aquatic insects and sometimes snails; possibly swallowed accidentally along with plants. ,Usually first breeds at age of 3 years. "Triumph display" important in pair bond: male briefly attacks some other bird; then returns to female with neck outstretched and wings partly open; and both male and female call loudly. Nest site is on ground; usually near water; generally surrounded by grasses; sedges; low shrubs. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression lined with plant materials; with down added near end of egg-laying. 
Greater-Yellowlegs,Tringa melanoleuca,Sandpipers,Open marshes; mudflats; streams; ponds; in summer; wooded muskeg; spruce bogs. During migration and winter; found in wide variety of settings; including tidal flats; estuaries; open beaches; salt and fresh marshes; shores of lakes and ponds; riverbanks. Breeds in boggy and marshes places within northern coniferous forest.,Typically forages in shallow water. Often feeds very actively; sometimes running after minnows. May forage by walking forward while swinging its head back and forth with the tip of the bill in the water.,Usually 4. Buff; blotched with gray and dark brown. Incubation is probably by both parents; about 23 days. Young: Downy young are able to leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young; and protest noisily with attacks or distraction displays if predators or humans come anywhere near. Young find all their own food. Age at first flight probably about 18-20 days.,Includes insects and small fish. In breeding season; probably feeds mostly on insects and their larvae. In migration and winter; often feeds on small fishes such as killifish; minnows. Diet also includes crustaceans; snails; tadpoles; marine worms; sometimes berries. ,On breeding grounds; male performs display flight; alternately rising and falling with flutters and glides as it gives a loud; ringing; whistled song. Nest site is on ground; usually close to water; often placed close to log or other object. Nest is well concealed in hummock of moss; a shallow depression lined sparsely with grass or leaves. 
Green-Heron,Butorides virescens,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Lakes; ponds; marshes; swamps; streamsides. May be found foraging in practically any aquatic habitat; but most common around small bodies of fresh water; especially those lined with trees; shrubs; tall marsh vegetation. Nests in a wide variety of situations; including willow thickets; mangroves; dry woods; open marsh.,Forages mostly by standing still or stalking very slowly at edge of shallow water; waiting for prey to approach. Sometimes uses "bait;" dropping feather or small twig on surface of water to lure fish within striking distance.,3-5; sometimes 2-7. Pale green or blue-green. Incubation is by both sexes; 19-21 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young begin to climb about near nest by 16-17 days after hatching; usually make first flight at 21-23 days; but are fed by parents for a few more weeks. Young are reportedly capable of swimming well. 1 or 2 broods per year.,Mostly fish. Eats small fish such as minnows; sunfishes; gizzard shad; also crayfish and other crustaceans; aquatic insects; frogs; tadpoles. Other items include grasshoppers; snakes; earthworms; snails; small rodents. ,May nest as isolated pairs or in small groups; rarely in large colonies. Male chooses nesting territory and calls repeatedly from prominent perch in tree or shrub. Displays of male include stretching neck forward and down and snapping bill shut; pointing bill straight upward while swaying back and forth. Male and female may perform display flights around territory. Nest:  Site is usually in shrub or tree 5-30' above ground; but sometimes on ground; often very close to water but can be quite distant. Nest is a platform of sticks; male begins construction; then female builds while male brings materials. 
Green-Jay,Cyanocorax yncas,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Brush; woodlands. In Texas; most common in dense native woodlands in the lowlands dominated by acacia; ebony; and hackberry; also lives in more open mesquite brush and stands of short oaks; and in some suburbs with native vegetation nearby. In the tropics; often in humid forest in foothills and lower mountain slopes.,Forages by moving actively through trees and shrubs; examining the foliage for food; drops to the ground for some items; and sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air. Cracks open hard seeds and nuts by pounding them with bill. Will come to bird feeders for a variety of items.,3-5. Pale gray to greenish white; heavily spotted with brown and lavender. Incubation is by female only; about 17-18 days. Male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest about 19-22 days after hatching. Young remain in parents' territory through nesting season of following year; then are evicted. In some tropical areas; these one-year-olds help with feeding young in nest; but apparently those in Texas do not.,Omnivorous. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; grasshoppers; crickets; true bugs; wasps; and many others. Also eats spiders; centipedes; small rodents; lizards; eggs and young of small birds. Feeds on plant material including various seeds; nuts; berries; and small fruits. ,Pair or family group may defend territory throughout the year. Nest: In Texas; site is in dense tree or shrub; usually 5-15' above the ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky but loose cup of sticks; thorny twigs; lined with rootlets; grass; moss; and sometimes leaves. 
Green-Kingfisher,Chloroceryle americana,Kingfishers,Rivers; streams. Always found near water; but sometimes near very small streams with only intermittent pools. Also around edges of ponds and larger rivers. Favors areas where there is dense low growth on the banks; providing low perches close to the water.,Forages mostly by perching low; typically on an overhanging branch or root 3-6' above the water; sometimes on a rock in mid-stream; watching for small fish swimming close to the surface. When prey is spotted; bird flies down and plunges into water headfirst to take fish in its bill. Seldom hovers before diving.,3-6; usually 5. White. Incubation is by both parents; 19-21 days; female incubates at night; male part of day. Young: Fed by both parents. Young leave nest about 22-26 days after hatching; may be fed by parents for several days thereafter.,Small fish. Feeds on minnows and other small fish; mostly those about 1-2" long. May also take some aquatic insects. ,Nesting pair defends territory along stream; maintaining good distance from other pairs. Nest site is in burrow in vertical dirt bank near water. Burrow (probably excavated by both sexes) is usually 2-3' long; 5-8' above the water level; and no more than about 2" in diameter. The entrance to the burrow is usually hidden by overhanging vegetation or roots (in other kingfishers; entrance is usually exposed). At the end of the burrow is a slightly enlarged nest chamber; usually with no nest material added. 
Green-Parakeet,Psittacara holochlora,African and New World Parrots,Native populations in tropical and subtropical woodlands; farmlands; and plantations; feral US populations in the Rio Grande Valley of southern Texas.,NA,NA,NA,NA
Green-breasted-Mango,Anthracothorax prevostii,Hummingbirds,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Green-tailed-Towhee,Pipilo chlorurus,New World Sparrows,Brushy mountain slopes; low chaparral; open pines; sage; manzanita; riverine woods. Breeds in a variety of semi-open habitats; mostly in mountains; typically where there is dense low cover of sagebrush; manzanita; or other bushes; and a few taller trees such as scattered pines. In migration and winter; mostly in dense low brush; often near streams.,Forages mostly on the ground under thickets; often scratching in the leaf-litter like other towhees. Also sometimes forages up in low bushes. Will come to bird feeders; but typically forages on the ground below the feeding tray.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. White; with heavy dotting of brown and gray often concentrated at larger end. Details of incubation are not well known. If adult is disturbed at nest; the bird may slip away quietly through the brush or may drop to the ground and scurry away like a rodent. Young: Probably both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which the young leave the nest is not well known. Possibly 2 broods per year.,Mainly insects and seeds. Diet is not known in detail; but includes various insects such as beetles; crickets; and caterpillars. Also eats many seeds of weeds and grasses; and sometimes feeds on berries and small fruits. ,Nesting behavior is not well studied. Male defends nesting territory by singing; often from a prominent raised perch. Nest site is on the ground or in low shrubs such as sagebrush; usually lower than 3' above the ground. Nest is a large; deep cup; loosely made of twigs; grass; weeds; strips of bark; lined with fine grass; rootlets; animal hair. 
Green-winged-Teal,Anas crecca,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; rivers; bays. In summer; open country near shallow freshwater lakes and marshes. In migration and winter; found on coastal estuaries and tidal marshes; also on shallow lakes and ponds inland; seeming to prefer those with much standing or floating vegetation.,Forages by wading or swimming in very shallow water while filtering mud with bill; up-ending; or picking items from water's surface. May feed by night or day.,6-11; rarely up to 15 or 18. Cream to pale buff. Incubation is by female only; 20-24 days; usually 21. Young: leave nest a few hours after hatching. Female cares for ducklings; which may return to the nest for the first few nights; young find all their own food. Young fledge at about 35 days.,Mostly plant material. Diet quite variable with season and location. Feeds especially on seeds of grasses; sedges; pondweeds; many others. Also takes aquatic insects; crustaceans; mollusks; tadpoles; rarely earthworms; fish eggs. May feed more on animal matter in summer; seeds in winter. ,Pairs usually arrive already mated on breeding grounds. In one courtship display; male rears up out of water; arching head forward and downward to shake bill very rapidly in water while giving a sharp whistle. Nest site is usually among grasses and weeds of meadow; sometimes in open woodland or brush; within 200' of water. Well hidden by surrounding grasses or shrubs; which often form complete canopy. Nest (built by female) is a shallow depression filled with grasses; twigs; and leaves; lined with down. 
Groove-billed-Ani,Crotophaga sulcirostris,Cuckoos; Roadrunners; Anis,Thick brush; overgrown pastures. In the United States; found mostly where dense thickets are next to open grassland; pastures; or marshes; or at edges of low riverside woods. In the tropics; inhabits any kind of semi-open country in the lowlands; avoiding unbroken forest.,Forages mostly by hopping and running on the ground; will also forage in bushes; especially to eat berries. Often associates closely with cattle in open pastures; catching the insects flushed by the larger animals. In a similar way; at the edges of tropical forest; will follow swarms of army ants to eat the insects or other creatures flushed by the ants.,3-4 (perhaps sometimes more) laid by each female in group. Eggs pale blue. Females may attempt to throw out each other's eggs. Incubation is apparently by all adults in group (dominant male usually incubates at night); 13-14 days. Young: Fed by all adults in group. Young climb out of nest after about 6-7 days; can fly poorly at about 10 days; can fly well at about 17 days. Sometimes 2 broods per year.,Mostly large insects. Feeds on insects including grasshoppers; beetles; and others. May take external parasites from cattle. Also eats spiders; lizards; other small creatures. Will feed on small fruits and berries. ,In courtship; male feeds female. Often uses communal nest: one to 4 pairs will work together to build nest; then the female of  each pair will lay eggs in the nest; and all adults will help incubate the eggs. In addition to the breeding pairs; group may include extra adult "helpers."  Nest site is in low tree; usually 5-15' above ground; sometimes lower or higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is bulky and bowl-shaped; made of twigs; lined with green leaves. 
Guadalupe-Murrelet,Synthliboramphus hypoleucus,Auks; Murres; Puffins,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Gull-billed-Tern,Gelochelidon nilotica,Gulls and Terns,Salt marshes; fields; coastal bays. Restricted to seacoast in North America (except in Florida and at Salton Sea; California); but does most foraging over marshes; pastures; farmland; and other open country just inland from coast. Nests mostly on beaches; islands. Reportedly used to nest more often in salt marshes; abandoned those sites because of human persecution.,Forages by flying slowly into wind; dipping to surface of land or water to pick up items; or by catching flying insects in the air. Sometimes forages while walking on ground; rarely plunges into water.,2-3; sometimes 1-4. Pale buff; spotted with dark brown. Incubation is by both parents (although female may do more); 22-23 days. Young: Leave nest a few days after hatching; move to dense plant cover if nearby. Both parents bring food for young. Age at first flight 4-5 weeks. Young may remain with parents 3 months or more; beginning southward migration with them.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; caught on ground; in air; or at surface of water; also spiders; crabs; shrimp; mollusks; earthworms; marine worms; small fish; lizards; frogs; toads; rodents; small birds. ,Colonial breeder. Colonies usually small; not as densely packed as those of many terns. Has some aerial displays; but much of courtship display takes place on ground; involving elaborate posturing; bill-pointing; male feeding female. Nest site is on open ground; sometimes on gravel roof. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow depression; often with rim of soil; addition of some plant material and debris. 
Gunnison-Sage-Grouse,Centrocercus minimus,Pheasants and Grouse,Sagebrush plains. Found on open plains and high valleys; but only in vicinity of sagebrush. Prime nesting habitat includes some lower wet areas where young can forage for insects.,Forages by walking on ground; browsing leaves and other plant parts; or picking up items from ground.,Usually 7-9; sometimes 6-13. Olive-buff; evenly dotted with brown. Incubation is by female only; 25-27 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Young are tended by female; but feed themselves. Able to make short flights at age of 1-2 weeks; but do not reach adult size until much later.,Mostly sage leaves and buds; also insects. Diet in fall and winter may be almost entirely the leaves and fresh shoots of sagebrush. At other seasons; also eats leaves; flowers; and buds of a wide variety of plants; also some insects in summer (young eat many insects at first). Unlike most grouse; digestive system is not adapted for digesting hard seeds. ,Traditional display grounds may be used for years. In courtship display; male puffs out white chest; inflates two yellow air sacs; raises and spreads tail; and raises tuft of plumes on back of head; head is thrown back as air sacs are deflated with low popping sound. Females visit display ground to mate with one of the males. Oldest and most experienced males compete for positions at center of display ground; and these males are usually chosen by females. Nest site is on ground; under sagebrush or clump of grass. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression; sparsely lined with plant material. 
Gyrfalcon,Falco rusticolus,Falcons,Arctic barrens; seacoasts; open mountains. Breeds in Arctic regions having open tundra for hunting and cliffs for nesting sites. Often occurs along coasts and rivers; where prey may be more abundant. Mostly in treeless country; but occurs along the edges of northern forest in some places. Wintering birds south of Arctic tend to be either along coast or in very open country inland.,Hunts by scanning its surroundings from a perch on a high rock; or while flying. Prey may be taken by surprise; the falcon approaching very low over the ground; or may be pursued relentlessly in flight over long distances.,Usually 3-4; sometimes 2-5. White or creamy white; spotted with reddish-brown. Incubation is by both parents; but female does more. Young: For first 1-3 weeks; young are brooded most of time; mostly by female; male does all or most of hunting during this time; bringing food which female feeds to the nestlings. After 2-3 weeks; female hunts also. Age of young at first flight about 45-50 days.,Mainly birds; some mammals. Feeds mostly on medium-sized to large birds. Ptarmigan are mainstays of diet on Arctic tundra; while coastal Gyrs may take more gulls; ducks; and geese; but numerous other species eaten on occasion. Also some mammals; including lemmings; ground squirrels; hares. Wintering birds in west have been seen taking birds as large as Sage Grouse. ,Pairs may occupy nest sites very early in season; even in late winter. Members of pair display at nest site with bowing and scraping motions; male brings food to female. Nest: Most nest sites are on cliffs; and most are on old nests built by other birds; such as ravens or Golden Eagles. Sometimes breeds on open ledges with no nest structure present; and sometimes uses old nests in trees; such as spruce or poplar (tree nesting is frequent in some areas). Does not add material to existing nests. 
Hairy-Woodpecker,Dryobates villosus,Woodpeckers,Forests; woodlands; river groves; shade trees. Accepts wide variety of habitats so long as large trees present; found in deciduous; coniferous; and mixed forest; groves along rivers in prairie country; open juniper woodland; swamps. In southwest and from Mexico to Panama found in mountain forests; mostly of pine; but also in cloud forest in Central America.,Forages mainly on the trunks and limbs of trees; sometimes on vines; shrubs. Energetic in its search; often probing; scaling off bark; and excavating into dead wood in pursuit of insects. Males may forage more deliberately than females; working longer in one spot.,4; sometimes 3-6. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night; female most of day); about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Male may forage farther from nest; making fewer feeding trips with more food each time. Young leave nest 28-30 days after hatching; are fed by parents for some time afterward. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds especially on larvae of wood-boring beetles; also other beetles; ants; caterpillars; and others. Also eats some berries; seeds; nuts. Will feed on sap at damaged trees or at sapsucker workings; and will come to bird feeders for suet. ,Male and female may maintain separate territories in early winter; pairing up in mid-winter; often with mate from previous year. Female's winter territory becomes focus of nesting territory. Courtship includes both birds drumming in duet; ritualized tapping at symbolic nest sites by female. Nest site is cavity (excavated by both sexes); mainly in deciduous trees in east; in aspens or dead conifers in west. Cavity usually 4-60' above ground. 
Hammonds-Flycatcher,Empidonax hammondii,Tyrant Flycatchers,High conifer forests; in migration; other trees. Breeds in cool coniferous forests; often where conifers such as Douglas-fir or spruce are mixed with aspens or other deciduous trees. In some areas; may breed in pure stands of aspens. Winters mostly in pine-oak woods of mountains in Mexico and Central America.,Forages by watching from a perch and then flying out to catch insects; usually returning to perch to eat them. Uses feeding perches at various heights in forest; often low; may take insects in mid-air; from surface of foliage or branches; or from the ground.,4; sometimes 3. Creamy white; sometimes lightly spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; 15-16 days. Young: Female broods young when they are small; and both parents bring food to nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 16-18 days. Young may remain in a group; tended by parents; for a week or more after fledging.,Insects. Apparently feeds only on insects. Summer diet includes beetles; caterpillars; moths; flies; leafhoppers; and small wasps. Winter diet not well known. ,In courtship; male approaches female; giving trilled call and fluttering wings. Nest site is on horizontal branch of tree (often Douglas-fir; pine; fir; or aspen); 10-100' above the ground; averaging about 25-35' up. Nest (built by female; rarely with help from male) is cup of weed stems; grass; strips of bark; lichens; and other items; lined with finer materials such as feathers; fur; and plant down. Spiderwebs often worked into nest. Nest looks more like those of wood-pewees than those of other Empidonax flycatchers. 
Harlequin-Duck,Histrionicus histrionicus,Ducks and Geese,Mountain streams in summer; rocky coastal waters in winter. Nests along shallow fast-moving rivers and streams; even around rapids and waterfalls; often in forested country. Generally not on streams fed by melting glaciers (where food may be scarce). At other seasons mostly on ocean; on exposed coastlines where waves pound on rocks; seldom on sheltered bays.,forages by swimming underwater or by diving and walking on the bottom; also by dabbling at surface or up-ending in shallow water. Uses bill to pry food items off of rocks underwater.,usually 5-7; sometimes 3-10. Pale buff or cream. Incubation is by female only; 27-30 days. Female covers eggs with down when leaving nest. Young: leave nest shortly after hatching. Young are tended by female but feed themselves; are able to dive when quite small; but take most food from water's surface at first. Broods often combine under care of multiple adult females. Age at first flight probably 5-6 weeks after hatching.,mollusks; crustaceans; insects. Diet at sea is mostly mollusks (including mussels and periwinkles) and crustaceans (including crabs and others); also a few small fish; marine worms. On rivers may eat mostly aquatic insects; and may eat small amounts of plant material. ,First breeds at age of 2 years. Pairs form during winter and spring. Several males may court one female; surrounding her on water. Displays of male involve raising tail and stretching neck; with ritualized head-bobbing movements. Nest site is on ground; usually close to water; well hidden under bushes or among rocks; in Pacific Northwest; rarely nests in tree cavity. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression with grasses; weeds; twigs; lined with down. 
Harriss-Hawk,Parabuteo unicinctus,Hawks and Eagles,River woods; mesquite; brush; cactus deserts. Found mostly in open dry country. Most common in saguaro cactus desert in Arizona; in mesquite brushland in Texas and New Mexico. Also found in trees along rivers; and recently has become resident in suburban areas of some southwestern cities.,Hunts actively; in low flight; pursuing prey around bushes and thickets. Often two or three hunt together; and a fleeing animal that evades one hawk may be caught by the next; larger prey is often shared by the hawks.,3-4; sometimes 1-5. Pale bluish-white; sometimes with a few brown spots. Incubation is mostly by female; 33-36 days. At nests with 2 males; both males bring food to incubating female; and take shorter turns sitting on the eggs. Young: May be brooded and fed mostly by the female; but most food is brought by the male(s). Young move out of nest to nearby perches after about 40 days; gradually develop to strong flight. Adults may raise 2-3 broods per season; and young from earlier nesting may help feed the young in later broods.,Small mammals; birds; lizards. Feeds on a wide variety of small creatures. Common prey includes ground squirrels; rabbits; wood rats; kangaroo rats; and many medium-sized birds; such as quail and woodpeckers. Eats large lizards when they are common. Also sometimes large insects. ,Often nests in triads; with two males mated to one female; all three adults associating peacefully at the nest and cooperating in raising the young. Courtship (involving two; three; or more birds) includes soaring; circling; and diving. Nest site is usually in small tree (such as mesquite or paloverde) or in arms of giant saguaro cactus; usually 12-25' above ground; sometimes higher on powerline tower; tall tree. Nest (built by both sexes) is bulky structure of sticks; lined with twigs and grass; with leafy twigs added throughout nesting cycle. Nest may be reused several times. 
Harriss-Sparrow,Zonotrichia querula,New World Sparrows,Stunted boreal forest; in winter; brush; open woods. Breeds in the zone where northern forest gives way to tundra; in areas with mixture of stunted spruce or larch trees; shrubby thickets; and open tundra. During migration and winter; found in thickets; woodland edges; brushy fields; hedgerows; shelterbelts.,Forages mostly while hopping on ground; sometimes scratching in leaf-litter with feet. Also does some foraging up in bushes.,3-5; usually 4. Pale green; marked with brown. Incubation is by female only; 12-15 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 8-10 days after hatching; unable to fly until a few days later. 1 brood per year.,Mostly seeds; insects; berries. Diet varies with season; may include more seeds in winter; berries in late spring after arrival on breeding grounds; insects during summer nesting season. Items important at some seasons include seeds of weeds and grasses; fruits of crowberry and bearberry; and various beetles; flies; caterpillars; true bugs; and other insects; as well as spiders. Also eats some flowers and conifer needles. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing and by actively chasing intruding males. Pairs form quickly after arrival on breeding grounds; soon after territories established. Nest site is on ground; usually on small hummock; well hidden under dwarf birch; alder; spruce; or other shrub or low tree. Typically in shallow depression scraped out in moss or other ground cover; sometimes placed under overhang of rock or soil. Nest (probably built by female) is a cup of moss; lichens; twigs; lined with fine grass and sometimes animal hair. 
Heermanns-Gull,Larus heermanni,Gulls and Terns,Coast and nearby open ocean. Favors the immediate coast; including beaches; rocky shores; estuaries; coastal lagoons; offshore kelp beds. Unlike some other coastal gulls; seldom visits freshwater ponds or garbage dumps even a short distance inland. May occur far offshore; out of sight of land.,Forages in flight over sea; dipping to surface or plunging into water for fish. Pirates much food from other birds: steals fish directly from bill pouch of pelican; harasses other birds to force them to drop or disgorge their catch. Also will take eggs of other birds and will scavenge refuse or carrion; but seems to do so less than some gulls.,2-3. Variable in color; pale gray to blue-gray; blotched with brown; lavender; olive. Incubation is by both sexes; probably about 28 days. Adults incubate eggs in cool temperatures; shade them during day; eggs could easily overheat in intense sun of hot desert islands. Young: Fed by both parents. Age at first flight not well known.,Fish and other small marine life. Eats many small fish; also crustaceans; mollusks; insects. Sometimes eats eggs of other birds; refuse; or carrion. ,Breeding behavior not well known. Nests during spring in colonies on islands off west coast of Mexico. Some colonies very large; only a few scattered nesting records on U.S. coast. Nest site is on level ground; usually in colony on island. Nest (probably built by both sexes) may be shallow scrape in soil with very little lining; or more substantial cup of grass and weeds; lined with feathers. 
Henslows-Sparrow,Centronyx henslowii,New World Sparrows,Weedy fields. Requirements not well understood; often absent from seemingly suitable habitat. Breeds in fields and meadows; often in low-lying or damp areas; with tall grass; standing dead weeds; and scattered shrubs. Sometimes in old pastures; occasionally in hayfields. Winters in various kinds of rank weedy fields.,Apparently does all of its foraging on the ground. Almost always forages alone; not associating in flocks with its own kind or other sparrows.,3-5. Whitish to pale greenish-white; with reddish-brown and gray spots concentrated toward the larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 11 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-10 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and seeds. Summer diet is mainly insects; including crickets; grasshoppers; beetles; stink bugs; caterpillars; small wasps; and many others; also some spiders and snails. Many seeds are also eaten; and probably make up the majority of the winter diet; included are seeds of weeds; grasses; and sedges. ,May breed in small; loose colonies; which change in location from year to year; territories within these colonies are often separated by unoccupied ground; so there is little conflict among the birds. Males perch on exposed weeds to deliver their short; inconspicuous song. Courtship may involve male leading female to potential nest sites; carrying bits of grass in his bill. Nest site is on or near the ground; very well hidden. Usually placed in the base of a clump of grass; sometimes in a slight depression in the ground; occasionally more than a foot up among vertical stems. Ground nests often have grass partly arched over them; adding to concealment. Nest (built mostly by female) is an open cup of grass and weeds; lined with finer grass and sometimes with animal hair. 
Hepatic-Tanager,Piranga flava,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Open mountain forests; oaks; pines. In our area; breeds at middle elevations in mountains and canyons; in forest of oaks and tall pines; also in some regions in low pinyon pine woods with a scattering of taller trees. In the tropics; lives mostly in the mountains; also locally in lowland pine savanna.,Forages rather slowly and deliberately; hopping along branches and pausing to peer about at the foliage. Mostly feeds high in trees; but sometimes forages in low shrubs and rarely on the ground. Sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air.,3-5; typically 4. Bluish green; with brown spots often concentrated at the larger end. Incubation behavior and length of incubation period not well known. Young: Probably both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which the young leave the nest is not well known.,Mainly insects; also berries. Apparently feeds largely on insects; including caterpillars and beetles; probably many others. Also eats berries and small fruits; especially in late summer; including wild grapes. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. Nest site is in tall tree; often pine; oak; or sycamore; usually 15-50' above the ground. Usually placed at a fork of a horizontal branch well out from the trunk. Nest is a shallow open cup made of grass and weed stems; lined with fine grass. Apparently built mostly by the female; although male may accompany her and may help carry nest material. 
Hermit-Thrush,Catharus guttatus,Thrushes,Conifer or mixed woods; forest floor; in winter; woods; thickets; parks. Breeding habitats vary in different regions; included are spruce woods; sphagnum bogs; dry pine woods; second growth in burns with standing dead trees; thickly wooded canyons; mountain forests of spruce and fir. In migration and winter found in any kind of woodland.,Does much foraging on ground; picking up insects from leaf-litter or soil; also feeds up in shrubs and trees; often hovering momentarily while grabbing an insect or berry.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 6. Pale blue or greenish blue; occasionally flecked with brown or black. Incubation is by female; about 12 days.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds on a variety of insects; including beetles; ants; caterpillars; true bugs; grasshoppers; crickets; and many others; also spiders; earthworms; rarely small salamanders. Also eats many berries; especially in winter; diet includes elderberries; pokeberries; serviceberries; grapes; mistletoe berries; and many others. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing; especially in morning and evening. Nest site for nest varies with region. To the east and north; often on the ground; in a natural hollow on the side of a hummock and well hidden by overhanging branches or surrounding low vegetation. To the west; usually in a tree; especially a conifer; 312' above the ground. Nest (built by female alone) is a bulky; well made open cup of moss; weeds; twigs; bark strips; ferns; lined with softer materials such as pine needles; rootlets; and plant fibers.
Hermit-Warbler,Setophaga occidentalis,Wood Warblers,Conifer forests; in migration; conifers and deciduous woods. Breeds mostly in moist; dense forests near sea level; especially in forests of Douglas-fir; hemlock; and western redcedar. Also nests in cooler; wetter forests of fir and other trees at higher elevations. In winter found in pine-oak forests of mountains in Mexico; also in oaks and conifers along California coast.,Forages mainly in the canopy of tall trees; sometimes up to 200' above the ground. Males often forage higher than females. Takes insects from twigs while perching and while hovering; and flies out to catch insects in mid-air. Moves from trunk of tree out to branch tips; then begins again at trunk. Will hang from twigs like a chickadee. In migration and winter; often forages in flocks with other birds.,4-5; sometimes 3. Creamy; with fine brown flecks in wreath at larger end. Incubation is probably by both parents; probably about 12 days. This species apparently is almost never parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Fed by female and possibly by male as well. Young leave the nest 8-10 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Has been observed feeding on caterpillars; tiny beetles; and flying insects; also small spiders. ,Males arrive on the breeding grounds in early May; and establish territories by singing. The first eggs are laid by the first part of June. Nest: Typical site is on horizontal branch; well out from trunk and 20-40' above the ground. Nest is a compact; deep; open cup of fibrous weeds stalks; pine needles; twigs; lichen; moss; cobwebs; and lined with soft material such as soft bark; feathers; and animal hair. Female alone builds nest. 
Herring-Gull,Larus argentatus,Gulls and Terns,Ocean coasts; bays; beaches; lakes; piers; farmlands; dumps. Wide variety of habitats; typically associated with water. Most numerous along coast and around large lakes; also along major river systems. Forages at sea; on beaches; mudflats; plowed fields; marshes; or where human activity provides food (garbage dumps; picnic grounds; docks; fishing operations). Nests on islands; sometimes on gravel roofs.,Opportunistic. Forages while walking; swimming; or flying; dipping down to take items from surface of water or land; sometimes plunge-diving into water. May steal food from other birds. May carry hard-shelled items (such as crabs; mollusks) high in air and drop them on rocks to break them open.,3; sometimes 1-2; rarely 4. Buff to olive; blotched with black; brown; dark olive. Incubation is by both sexes; 27-30 days. Young: May leave nest a day or two after hatching; remain in immediate area. Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young capable of flight 45-50 days after hatching; may be fed by parents for another month.,Omnivorous. Diet varies with place and season; includes fish; crustaceans; mollusks; sea urchins; marine worms; birds; eggs; insects. Scavenges refuse and carrion. At sea; may feed on schools of fish driven to surface by foraging whales. ,Usually first breeds at age of 4-5 years. Nests in colonies (often with other species of gulls); sometimes in isolated pairs. In courtship; female approaches male with hunched posture and begging calls; male displays with upright posture; "choking" motions; feeds female. Nest site on ground; next to object such as shrub or rock which protects from prevailing wind. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow scrape; usually lined with grass; feathers; debris. 
Himalayan-Snowcock,Tetraogallus himalayensis,Pheasants and Grouse,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Hoary-Redpoll,Acanthis hornemanni,Finches,Thickets; tundra scrub. In winter; also woodland edges; fields. Breeds in brushy places of far North; especially in low thickets of willow; alder; or dwarf birch on open tundra; sometimes along forest edge. Compared to Common Redpoll; tends to nest in more open or barren habitat. In winter; also found around woodland edges; brushy or weedy fields.,NA,4-5; sometimes 3-6; rarely 7. Pale green to blue-green; with reddish brown spots concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 9-14 days. Male feeds female on nest during incubation. Young: Probably both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-14 days after hatching.,FEEDING. Diet and feeding behavior very similar to those of Common Redpoll,Does not seem to defend nesting territories; several pairs may nest fairly close together; perhaps because good nesting sites tend to be concentrated in small patches surrounded by tundra. In courtship; male feeds female. Nest: Placed within a few feet of the ground in dense low shrubs; sometimes on the ground. Nest (built by female) is a small open cup of grass and plant down; sometimes with fine twigs; rootlets; leaves; lined with ptarmigan feathers and sometimes animal hair. 
Hooded-Merganser,Lophodytes cucullatus,Ducks and Geese,Wooded lakes; ponds; rivers. In summer in forested country; along creeks; narrow rivers; edges of ponds. May be in more open marsh habitats if artificial nest sites are provided. In winter on woodland ponds; wooded swamps; fresh and brackish coastal estuaries.,forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled by feet. Apparently finds all its food by sight; eyes adapted for good underwater vision.,10-12; sometimes 7-13. White. Eggshell thicker than in most ducks. Females often lay eggs in each others' nests; also in nests of Wood Ducks and others. Incubation is by female only; 26-41 days; usually about 33 days. Young: within 24 hours after hatching; young leave nest; female calls to them from below; young climb to cavity entrance and jump to ground. Young find their own food; female tends young for several weeks. Young fledge about 70 days after hatching.,fish and other aquatic life. Feeds mainly on small fish; crayfish and other crustaceans; and aquatic insects; also some tadpoles; a few mollusks; small amounts of plant material. Young ducklings eat mostly insects at first. ,Pairs may form in late fall or winter. In most courtship displays; male's crest is prominently raised and spread. Nest site is in tree cavity near water; usually 10'-50' above ground; rarely up to 80' or more. Also uses artificial nest boxes. Nest of natural wood chips and debris in bottom of cavity; with down added. 
Hooded-Oriole,Icterus cucullatus,Blackbirds and Orioles,Open woods; shade trees; palms. Breeds in groves of trees (such as cottonwood; walnut; sycamore) along streams and in canyons; and in open woods in lowlands. Often common in suburbs and city parks. Especially favors palm trees; and will nest in isolated groups of palms even in cities.,Forages rather slowly and deliberately in trees and large shrubs; gleaning insects from among foliage or feeding on berries. Regularly probes in flowers for nectar and probably takes insects there as well. A common visitor to hummingbird feeders.,4; sometimes 3-5. Whitish; irregularly blotched with brown; lavender; and gray. Incubation is by female; about 12-14 days. Bronzed Cowbirds very frequently lay eggs in nests of this species. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave nest about 14 days after hatching. 2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Includes insects; berries; nectar. Feeds on a variety of insects. May especially favor caterpillars; also eats beetles; wasps; ants; and many others. Feeds on many wild berries; and sometimes on cultivated fruit. Takes nectar from flowers; and will come to feeders to drink sugar-water. ,In courtship; male moves around female; posturing with deep bows and then pointing bill straight up while singing softly. Female may respond with similar posturing. Nest: Often placed in palm or large yucca; sewn to underside of large overhanging leaf; usually 10-50' above ground; but can be lower. Sometimes placed under banana leaf; in clump of mistletoe or Spanish moss; or suspended from branch of deciduous tree. Nest is a woven hanging pouch of grass and plant fibers; lined with plant down; hair; feathers. Female builds nest; but male may help bring material. 
Hooded-Warbler,Setophaga citrina,Wood Warblers,Forest undergrowth. Breeds in forest interiors of mixed hardwoods in the north and cypress-gum swamps in the south. During migration; found in deciduous and mixed eastern forests. In winter; males compete for territories in humid lowland forest and females occupy mainly disturbed scrub or secondary forest.,Hops on ground; low branches; or tree trunks while feeding; often gleaning insects from leaf surfaces in low shrubs. Will also make short flights to catch flying insects in the understory. Males may forage higher than females when feeding young. Both sexes maintain well-defined feeding territories during winter; giving conspicuous chip callnotes and attacking intruders of their own species.,Usually 4. Creamy white; with brown spots at larger end. Incubation is normally by female only; 12 days. Brown-headed Cowbirds lay eggs in many nests (up to 75% in some areas). Young: Fed by both parents. Young leave the nest 8-9 days after hatching; and can fly 2-3 days later. Fledglings are divided by parents; each adult caring for half the brood for up to 5 weeks. Often 2 broods per year.,Insects and other arthropods. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including caterpillars; moths; grasshoppers; beetles; flies; and many others; also eats many small spiders. ,Males usually return to occupy the same nesting territory as in previous years; but females usually move to a different territory. Nest: Female chooses site in patches of deciduous shrubs within forest or along edge. Site usually 1-4' above ground. Nest is open cup of dead leaves; bark; fine grasses; spiderwebs; hair; and plant down. Usually the female does most or all of the building. 
Hook-billed-Kite,Chondrohierax uncinatus,Hawks and Eagles,In Texas; found in native deciduous woodland in subtropical zone along lower Rio Grande. Farther south found in various kinds of forest; in Mexico favors deciduous and semi-arid woodlands; but also found in humid tropical forest farther south. High numbers of tree snails may be most important aspect of habitat.,Foraging behavior not well known. Apparently forages by climbing and walking about in upper branches of trees; looking for tree snails. On finding a snail; kite holds it against branch with left foot; uses hooked bill to break open shell. This species is remarkably variable in bill size; and smaller-billed birds tend to eat smaller snails.,2; sometimes 3. White; heavily marked with dark brown. Incubation is apparently by both sexes; with incubation period unknown. Young: Probably both parents feed the young. Age at first flight unknown; young may remain with parents for several months.,Mostly tree snails. Aside from snails; reported to eat frogs; salamanders; and insects. ,Details of breeding behavior not well known. Courtship display reportedly involves two birds flying in tight circles; diving at each other and calling. In Texas; nesting activity has been noted mostly in May and June. Nest site is in tree; 15-25' above ground. Nest (apparently built by both sexes) is a flimsy platform of sticks. 
Horned-Grebe,Podiceps auritus,Grebes,Lakes; ponds; coastal waters. Summers on lakes having both open water and marsh vegetation; surrounded by northern forest; prairie; sometimes out onto southern edges of tundra. Winters mainly on ocean; including protected bays and exposed shores. Also some in winter on large lakes and reservoirs; more commonly so in recent years.,Forages by diving from surface and swimming underwater; propelled by feet. Also takes items from on or above water's surface. Usually solitary in feeding; but flocks may rarely forage cooperatively; has been seen foraging in association with Surf Scoters.,4-6; sometimes 3-7. Whitish to very pale green or buff; becoming nest-stained. Both sexes incubate; 22-25 days. Young:  Can swim shortly after hatching; fed by both parents; and often ride on parents' backs. Age at first flight 55-60 days. One brood per year; sometimes 2; young from first brood may help in feeding of second.,Mostly insects; crustaceans; fish. Diet varies with habitat and season. In summer may eat mainly insects and crustaceans; also some fish; tadpoles; leeches; salamanders; small amounts of plant material. May eat mostly fish in winter; also crustaceans; mollusks; insects. Like other grebes; also swallows many feathers. ,Courtship displays involve posturing by both members of pair; both rise to vertical position on water with head feathers fully raised; turning heads rapidly; both dive and come up with bits of weed in bills; then rush across surface of water side by side carrying weeds. Nest:  Site is in shallow water; usually among marsh growth. Nest (built by both sexes) a floating heap of wet plant material (with depression in middle for eggs); usually anchored to standing vegetation. 
Horned-Lark,Eremophila alpestris,Larks,Prairies; fields; airports; shores; tundra. Inhabits open ground; generally avoiding areas with trees or even bushes. May occur in a wide variety of situations that are sufficiently open: short-grass prairies; extensive lawns (as on airports or golf courses); plowed fields; stubble fields; beaches; lake flats; dry tundra of far north or high mountains.,Forages entirely by walking and running on the ground; picking up items from ground or from plants low enough to reach. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale gray to greenish white; blotched and spotted with brown. Incubation is by female; about 10-12 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Young may leave nest after 9-12 days; not able to fly for another week. 1 brood per year in far north; 2-3 farther south.,Seeds and insects. Feeds on small seeds from a great variety of grasses and weeds; also waste grain. Many insects are also eaten; especially in summer; when they may make up half of the total diet. Also eats some spiders and snails; and eats berries of low-growing plants in some regions. ,Often nests quite early in spring. Male defends nesting territory by singing; either on ground or in flight. In flight song display; male flies up steeply in silence; often to several hundred feet above ground; then hovers and circles for several minutes while singing; finally dives steeply toward the ground. Nest site is on open ground; often next to grass clump; piece of dried cow manure; or other object. Nest (built by female) is slight depression in ground; lined with grass; weeds; rootlets; with inner lining of fine grass or plant down. One side of nest often has flat "doorstep" of pebbles. 
Horned-Puffin,Fratercula corniculata,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; nesting colonially in burrows or crevices on sea cliffs. During summer usually on ocean waters fairly close to shore of nesting islands; at other seasons may be very far offshore. Nests mainly on rocky islands.,Forages while swimming underwater. Swims rapidly through schools of small fish; catching them in bill.,one. Dull white; usually with faint spots of gray; lavender; brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 38-43 days. Young: both parents feed nestling; carrying fish in bill and dropping them in nest or near entrance. Adults generally forage in waters close to colony; may make more frequent feeding visits than Tufted Puffins. Young depart from nest at about 38-44 days; unable to fly well at departure; they flutter or tumble down to water and swim out to sea; apparently independent from then on.,mostly fish. Favors small fish; especially sand lance and capelin; also sticklebacks; smelt; and others. Food brought to young almost entirely fish. Adults also eat many squid; marine worms; and crustaceans. ,Breeds in colonies on islands; usually with other species of auks. Nest site is in burrow in ground; 1-3' or longer; perhaps sometimes with two entrances; also in natural crevice in cliff or among boulders. Burrow (apparently excavated by both sexes) may be re-used in following years. Nest chamber may by lined with grasses or may be bare. 
House-Finch,Haemorhous mexicanus,Finches,Cities; suburbs; farms; canyons. Original habitat was probably streamside trees and brush in dry country; woodland edges; chaparral; other semi-open areas. Now most commonly associated with humans in cities; towns; and farmland; especially in areas with lawns; weedy areas; trees; buildings. Avoids unbroken forest or grassland.,Forages on ground; while perching in weeds; or up in trees and shrubs. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks. Will come to feeders for seeds; especially sunflower seeds; and to hummingbird feeders for sugar-water.,4-5; sometimes 2-6. Pale blue; with black and lavender dots mostly at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 12-15 days after hatching. Up to 3 broods per year; perhaps sometimes more.,Mostly seeds; buds; berries. Almost all of diet is vegetable matter. Feeds mainly on weed seeds. Other important items include buds and flower parts in spring; berries and small fruits in late summer and fall. Also eats a few insects; mostly small ones such as aphids. Young are fed on regurgitated seeds. ,Pairs may begin to form within flocks in winter; and some paired birds may remain together all year. In breeding season; male performs flight-song display; singing while fluttering up with slow wingbeats and then gliding down. Male feeds female during courtship and incubation. Males may sing at any time of year; and females also sing during spring. Nest: Wide variety of sites; especially in conifers; palms; ivy on buildings; cactus; holes in manmade structures; averaging about 12-15' above the ground. Sometimes use sites such as cavities; hanging planters; old nests of other birds. Nest (built mostly by female) is open cup of grass; weeds; fine twigs; leaves; rootlets; sometimes with feathers; string; or other debris added. 
House-Sparrow,Passer domesticus,Old World Sparrows,Cities; towns; farms. General surroundings vary; but in North America essentially always found around manmade structures; never in unaltered natural habitats. Lives in city centers; suburbs; farms; also around isolated houses or businesses surrounded by terrain unsuited to House Sparrows; such as desert or forest.,Forages mostly while hopping on ground. May perch on weed stalks to reach seeds. Adaptable in seeking food; may take smashed insects from the fronts of parked cars; or search tree bark for insects. Comes to bird feeders for a wide variety of items.,Usually 3-6; sometimes 2-7; rarely 1-8. Whitish to greenish white; with brown and gray dots concentrated toward larger end. Incubation is by both parents; 10-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 2 weeks after hatching. 2-3 broods per year.,Mostly seeds. In most situations; great majority of diet is weed and grass seeds or waste grain. Also eats some insects; especially in summer. In urban surroundings; also scavenges crumbs of food left by humans. ,In courtship; male displays by hopping near female with his tail raised; wings drooped; chest puffed out; bowing and chirping. Often breeds in small colonies. Pairs defend only a small territory in the immediate vicinity of nest; chasing away all intruders. Nest: Usually in an enclosed niche such as cavity in tree; hole in building; rain gutter; birdhouse; nests of other birds. Where such sites are scarce; will nest in open in tree branches. Nest (built by both parents) is made of material such as grass; weeds; twigs; trash; often lined with feathers. Inside enclosed space; material forms foundation; in open sites; nest is a globular mass with entrance on side. 
House-Wren,Troglodytes aedon,Wrens,Open woods; thickets; towns; gardens. Breeds in a wide variety of semi-open habitats; including suburbs; orchards; woodlots; open forest; streamside groves; mountain pine-oak woods; and many others. Winters mostly in areas of dense low growth; including thickets and streamside brush.,Forages very actively in dense vegetation. Forages at various levels; sometimes high in trees but usually low; searching for insects among foliage; on twigs and branches; in the bark of tree trunks; and on the ground.,6-7; sometimes 5-8; occasionally more. White; heavily dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is probably mostly or entirely by female; about 12-15 days. Young: Probably both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 12-18 days after hatching. 2 broods per year; rarely 3.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; true bugs; grasshoppers; crickets; caterpillars; moths; flies; and many others. Also eats many spiders; plus some millipedes and snails. ,Male defends territory by singing. Courtship involves male singing; showing the female potential nest sites. Adults often puncture the eggs of other birds nesting nearby (including other House Wrens). Male may have more than one mate; female may leave male to care for young from first brood while she moves to another male's territory and nests again. Nest site is in any kind of cavity; including natural hollows in trees and stumps; old woodpecker holes; crevices in buildings; often in nest boxes. May nest in almost any kind of enclosed space (flowerpots; parked cars; shoes; drainpipes; etc.). Site is usually low; may be high in trees; especially in western mountains. Male builds incomplete "dummy" nests in several cavities; female chooses one and finishes nest by adding lining. Nest has a foundation of twigs; topped with softer cup of plant fibers; grass; weeds; animal hair; feathers. 
Hudsonian-Godwit,Limosa haemastica,Sandpipers,Marshes; prairie pools; mudflats; edge of tundra in summer. Spring migrants are usually on shallow marshy lakes; flooded pastures; rice fields; mudflats around ponds. Fall migrants on Atlantic Coast may be on marshy ponds or tidal flats. Nesting habitat in far north is near treeline; where patches of tundra; open woods; and ponds are mixed.,Forages mostly by walking in shallow water; probing with bill in mud of bottom. Often wades so deeply that head is underwater part of the time.,4; rarely 3. Dark olive-brown; with rather obscure brown blotches. Incubation is by both sexes; about 22-25 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Young find all their own food; but are tended by both parents. Adults are very aggressive in defense of young. Young are able to fly at about 30 days.,Insects; mollusks; crustaceans; marine worms. Diet not well known. On breeding grounds; may feed mostly on insects; including many flies and their larvae. During migration; may feed on marine worms; mollusks; and crustaceans on coast; mostly insects inland. ,In display over nesting territory; male flies high; calling; at peak of display; he glides with wings in shallow "V" while calling intensely for up to a minute or more; then dives toward ground. Male often perches on treetop; in courtship; pursues female in flight. Nest site is on ground in sedge marsh; usually on top of hummock under prostrate dwarf shrub; sometimes in tussock of grass. Very well concealed; extremely hard to find. Nest is shallow depression in vegetation; with sparse lining of leaves. 
Huttons-Vireo,Vireo huttoni,Vireos,Woods and adjacent brush; prefers oaks. Breeds in oak and pine-oak forests; preferring evergreen oaks; or in tall chaparral. Also lives in mountain canyons in sycamores; maples; and willows along streams. In Pacific states; may be found in the shrubby understory of humid Douglas-fir and redwood forests. Winters in breeding habitat; also sometimes in thickets along lowland streams.,Forages in trees and shrubs by hopping from twig to twig; pausing to peer about as it searches for insects. Often hovers momentarily to pick an item from the foliage.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely fewer. White with brown specks near larger end. Incubation is by both parents; 14-16 days. Cowbirds often lay eggs in nests of this species. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest at about 14 days of age.,Mostly insects; some berries. Diet is not known in detail; but feeds mainly on insects (including some that seem large for small size of bird) such as caterpillars; beetles; and crickets; as well as spiders. Also eats some berries and small fruits; and some plant galls. ,Male sings almost constantly during breeding season to defend nesting territory. In courtship display; male approaches female; fluffs out his plumage; spreads his tail; and gives a whining call. Nest: Often in oak; sometimes in coniferous tree; usually 6-25' above the ground. Round cup-shaped nest is supported by the rim woven onto a forked twig. Nest (built by both sexes) is made of bark fibers; lichens; moss; grass; bound together with spiderwebs; lined with fine grass. Outside of nest often covered with whitish plant down and spider egg cases. 
Iceland-Gull,Larus glaucoides,Gulls and Terns,Coastal; less frequent inland. During most seasons found in coastal regions; both in protected bays and estuaries and well offshore. Some occur in winter on Great Lakes and other large bodies of water inland. Nests on rocky cliffs; mostly in protected bays and fjords rather than on exposed coastline.,Forages in flight by dipping to surface of water to pick up items or by plunging to just below surface; also feeds while swimming or walking.,2-3. Buff to olive; blotched with darker brown. Incubation is probably by both sexes; incubation period unknown. Young: Both parents probably feed young. Age of young at fledging not known.,Mostly fish. Aside from a variety of small fish; also feeds on mollusks; crustaceans; carrion; berries; seeds. Around colonies of smaller seabirds; may take eggs or young; and often scavenges dead young birds. Also may feed on refuse around garbage dumps; docks; fishing boats. ,Breeding behavior not well known. Probably does not breed until four years old. Nests in colonies; often in same colonies with Black-legged Kittiwakes; sometimes with Glaucous Gulls. In such mixed colonies; Iceland Gulls usually nest higher than kittiwakes; lower than Glaucous Gulls. Nest site is usually on ledge of a cliff facing the sea. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a bulky mound of grasses; moss; and debris; with a shallow depression at the top. 
Inca-Dove,Columbina inca,Pigeons and Doves,Towns; parks; farms. In the United States found mostly around human dwellings; especially where there are green lawns and plantings of trees. Will inhabit desert yards or very urbanized areas as long as water is available. Sometimes nests away from human habitations along lowland streams or rivers.,Forages almost entirely on the ground; walking about on bare soil or among short grass or weeds. Will also come to bird feeders (which may be important in maintaining city flocks). Regularly swallows grit (small gravel) to aid in digestion of hard seeds.,2. White. Incubation is by both parents; 15-16 days. Male incubates mostly during middle of day; female at other times. Young: Both parents presumably feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest at about 12-16 days; are tended by parents for another week or so. A pair may raise up to 4-5 broods per year.,Mostly seeds. Feeds on a wide variety of seeds; including waste grain; grass seeds; birdseed. May sometimes eat fruits; such as those of cactus. ,Male defends breeding territory against other males; displaying with one wing raised over back; males will sometimes fight vigorously. In courtship; male bobs head; raises tail high over back and spreads it widely to show off black and white markings. Nest site varies; usually in tree or shrub 5-20' above ground; sometimes as high as 50' or on ground. May be on building ledge; wire; other artificial site. Nest (built by female; with material gathered by male) a small platform of twigs; stems; leaves; sometimes lined with grass. 
Indigo-Bunting,Passerina cyanea,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Brushy pastures; bushy wood edges. For nesting favors roadsides; old fields growing up to bushes; edges of woodlands; and other edge habitats such as along rights-of-way for powerlines or railroads. Also in clearings within deciduous woods; edges of swamps. In the west; usually near streams. During winter in the tropics; most common around brushy edges of farm fields.,Forages at all levels from ground up into shrubs and trees. Takes insects from leaves; seeds from ground or stems; berries from shrubs. Forages alone in summer; in flocks in winter.,3-4; rarely 1-2. White to bluish-white; rarely with brown or purple spots. Incubation is by female only; 12-13 days; sometimes 11-14 days. Young: Fed only by female in most cases. At some nests; male helps feed young when they are nearly old enough to fly. Young usually leave nest 9-12 days after hatching. Male sometimes takes over feeding of fledged young while female begins second nesting attempt. 2 broods per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. In breeding season feeds mostly on insects and spiders; also some seeds; berries. Young in the nest are fed mostly insects at first. In winter; eats many seeds; also some insects. ,Male establishes territory in spring; defends it with song. Male may have more than one mate at a time living on his territory. Nest site is usually 1-3' above ground; rarely up to 30' or more; in dense shrub or low tree. Late in season; may nest in large weed such as goldenrod. Nest (built by female) an open cup of grass; leaves; weeds; bark strips; lined with finer materials. 
Island-Scrub-Jay,Aphelocoma insularis,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Mostly oak woodland and chaparral. Its major habitats on Santa Cruz Island consist of low chaparral dominated by island scrub oak and woodlands dominated by other species of oaks. As with many kinds of island birds; however; it is adaptable; taking advantage of other habitats such as pine woods and streamside thickets.,Forages on the ground and in trees; sometimes in flocks. Often harvests acorns and buries them; to retrieve and eat them later.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Light bluish green; spotted faintly with olive. Incubation is by female; about 18 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Age at first flight is not well known. 1 brood per year.,Omnivorous. Diet varies with season. Eats a wide variety of insects and other arthropods. Feeds heavily on acorns; especially in fall; as well as other seeds and berries. Also eats small lizards; snakes; mice; and the eggs and young of smaller birds. ,Unlike Florida Scrub-Jay and Mexican Jay; this species breeds in isolated pairs; not in cooperative flocks. Nest site is in tree or shrub; usually an oak; typically 6-10 feet above the ground but sometimes much higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky; thick-walled cup of twigs; lined with fine rootlets and sometimes with animal hair. 
Ivory-Gull,Pagophila eburnea,Gulls and Terns,Arctic Ocean; barren northern coasts. Usually around edges of floating ice at sea; also along shores of northern islands in vicinity of pack ice. Rarely farther south along coast; and very rare inland in winter. Nests on cliff ledges; bare rocky ground.,Does much of its feeding while walking on ice or beach. Forages in flight by dipping to surface of water; sometimes forages by swimming or wading.,1-2; rarely 3. Buff to olive; blotched with dark olive; brown; or black. Incubation is by both sexes; roughly 24-26 days. Young: Both parents feed young; and brood them while they are small. Young remain in nest until ready to fly; age at first flight not well known; but at least 5 weeks.,Carrion; small marine life. Diet includes small fish; crustaceans; insects. Often is primarily a scavenger; feeding on carrion (including kills left by polar bears) and on the droppings of walrus; seals; polar bears; and others. May feed on refuse around northern coastal towns. ,Usually breeds in colonies. Courtship displays include long calls; tossing head back so that bill points up; lowering head and doing "choking" movements. In courtship feeding; male regurgitates to feed female. Nest site is usually on cliff ledge; either coastal or inland; may be on flat rocky ground. Has been found nesting on patches of rock imbedded in floating icebergs. Nest (built by both sexes) is usually a bulky mound of seaweed; mud; debris; with shallow depression at top; sometimes little or no nest built. 
Jabiru,Jabiru mycteria,Storks,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Juniper-Titmouse,Baeolophus ridgwayi,Chickadees and Titmice,Pinyon-juniper woodland; locally river woods; shade trees. Found mainly in open woods of pinyon pine and juniper; as well as in oak or pine-oak woods.,Forages by hopping about in branches and larger twigs of trees; sometimes hanging upside down; searching for insects among the foliage and on the bark. Opens nuts and acorns by holding them with feet and pounding with bill. Comes to bird feeders for seeds or suet.,Usually 5-6; sometimes 4-7. White; sometimes lightly dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is probably by female only; 14-16 days. Young: Both parents bring food to nestlings. Young leave nest about 16-21 days after hatching.,Insects; nuts; seeds. Feeds mainly on insects; including many caterpillars; beetles; true bugs; and many others; as well as some spiders. Also eats pinyon nuts; acorns; weed seeds; and sometimes berries or small fruits. B,At least in some areas; pairs or family groups may defend territories all year. Nest site (possibly selected by female) is usually in hole in tree; sometimes hole in stump; fence post; or pole. May be natural cavity or old woodpecker hole. In rotten wood; both members of pair may work to enlarge small cavities for their use. Also will use nest boxes; or crevices in old; twisted trunks of juniper or pine. Nest has foundation of grass; weeds; moss; bark fibers; and lining of soft material such as feathers or animal hair. 
Kelp-Gull,Larus dominicanus,Gulls and Terns,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Kentucky-Warbler,Geothlypis formosa,Wood Warblers,Woodland undergrowth. In summer; prefers deep shaded woods with dense; humid thickets; bottomlands near creeks and rivers; ravines in upland deciduous woods; and edges of swamps. In winter in the tropics; requires dense lowland forests and second growth; mostly in lowlands but also in foothills.,Forages mainly by walking on ground; seeking insects among the leaf litter; flipping over dead leaves; sometimes leaping up in the air to take insects from the underside of foliage. In winter in the tropics; sometimes accompanies swarms of army ants; picking up insects that flee the ants. Individuals defend small winter feeding territories.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Creamy white; with brown spots. Incubation by female only; 12-13 days. Cowbirds often lay eggs in nests of this species. Young: Nestlings are fed by the female and rarely by the male. Young leave the nest 8-10 days after hatching. Both sexes then feed the fledglings for up to 17 days.,Mostly insects. Feeds on various insects including moths; bugs; ants; grasshoppers; beetles; caterpillars; aphids; grubs; also spiders; plus a few berries. ,During defense of breeding territories; males are persistent singers; singing as often as every 12 seconds. Nest: Placed on ground or within a few inches of it; at foot of shrub; in grass tussocks; bedstraw; or goldenrod; or sometimes in the lowest fork of small trees. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky; open cup of leaves; with a core of weeds; grass stems; lined with rootlets and hair. 
Key-West-Quail-Dove,Geotrygon chrysia,Pigeons and Doves,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Killdeer,Charadrius vociferus,Plovers,Fields; airports; lawns; river banks; mudflats; shores. Often found on open ground; such as pastures; plowed fields; large lawns; even at a great distance from water. Most successful nesting areas; however; have some shallow water or other good feeding area for the chicks. Also commonly found around water; on mudflats; lake shores; coastal estuaries.,Typically they run a few steps and then pause; then run again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible. May follow farmers plowing fields; to feed on grubs turned up by the plow.,Usually 4; sometimes 3-5. Buff; blotched with black and brown. Incubation is by both parents; 24-28 days. In very hot climates; adults shade eggs in mid-day; may soak belly feathers to help cool eggs. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Young are tended by both parents; but feed themselves. Age of young at first flight roughly 25 days. In some warmer parts of range; Killdeers raise 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; caterpillars; grasshoppers; fly larvae; many others; also eats spiders; earthworms; centipedes; crayfish; snails. Eats small amounts of seeds as well. ,In breeding season; male flies high over nesting territory in floating; wavering flight; with slow; deep wingbeats; giving kill-dee call repeatedly. On ground; courtship displays include ritualized nest-scrape making.  Nest site is on ground in open area with good visibility; as on bare soil; short-grass field; gravel road; sometimes on gravel roof. Nest is shallow scrape in soil or gravel; either unlined or lined with pebbles; grass; twigs; bits of debris. 
King-Eider,Somateria spectabilis,Ducks and Geese,Rocky coasts; ocean. Nests on high arctic tundra; both along coast and around freshwater lakes far inland. In winter on ocean; mostly in far north; including around edge of pack ice. Less tied to coast than Common Eider; may occur farther inland in summer and farther offshore in winter. Rarely on fresh water in winter; as on the Great Lakes.,Forages mainly underwater. Often forages in deep water and may dive more than 150' below surface.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. Pale olive. Incubation is by female only; 22-24 days. Young: leave nest shortly after hatching and go to water. Female tends young; but young find all their own food. Several broods of young often join (in group called "creche"); accompanied by several adult females. Age at first flight not known; probably 50+ days.,Mostly mollusks. Diet varies with season. Mollusks are among main foods at most times. Also eaten are crustaceans; insects; echinoderms; and some plant material. Insect larvae may be main foods in summer. ,Most pairs are formed in spring; during migration or near breeding grounds. Several males may court one female; surrounding her on water. Displays of male include turning head rapidly from side to side; rearing up out of water while rotating head; flapping wings; also various head movements accompanied by cooing calls. Faster displays than in Common Eider. Nest site usually on raised dry ground not far from water. Nest is a shallow depression lined with bits of plant material and with large amounts of down. 
King-Rail,Rallus elegans,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Fresh and brackish marshes; rice fields; swamps. Sometimes salt marshes in winter. Will use a variety of habitats with shallow fresh or brackish water and dense cover. Important plants include cattails; bulrushes; spartina; and others. May be in brushy swamps with many willows; or in flooded rice fields.,Mostly forages in shallow water; in or close to dense marsh cover. Large items (such as big crayfish or crabs) may be carried to solid ground and dismembered before being eaten.,Usually 10-12; sometimes 6-14. Pale buff; lightly spotted with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 21-23 days. Young: Downy young leave nest a few hours after hatching. Both parents feed young; after about 3 weeks; young start to pick up much of their own food. While young are small; adults may brood them at simple nest platforms near where they hatched. Young are able to make short flights at about 9-10 weeks. May have two broods per year in south.,Mostly insects and crustaceans. Diet includes many aquatic insects; especially beetles. Eats many crayfish and crabs; and sometimes many small fish. Also eats snails; clams; grasshoppers; frogs; spiders; and seeds of aquatic plants. ,In courtship; male walks about with tail raised; showing off white under tail coverts. Male may feed female. Nest site is in a clump of grass or sedges; usually about a foot above water or land. Nest (apparently built mostly by male) is a solid platform of grass; sedges; other marsh plants; with a canopy woven over the top and a ramp leading down from the entrance. Additional simpler nest platforms may be built nearby. 
Kirtlands-Warbler,Setophaga kirtlandii,Wood Warblers,Young jack pine; winters in dense understory of pines. Breeds only in large stands of young jack pines from 5-25' tall. Jack pine grows on sandy soils; and regenerates only after fires. In migration; seen in thickets and deciduous trees. During winter; rarely seen; found only in dense undergrowth of pine forests of the Bahamas.,Forages for insects near the ground and in lower parts of pines and oaks. Will hop on ground to probe for insects. Gleans insects from pine needles and other vegetation; and occasionally takes items while hovering. Solitary in its foraging in winter.,4; sometimes 3-6. Buff or pinkish-white with brown spots at larger end. Incubation is by female only; 13-15 days; males feed females on nest during incubation. Up to 70% of nests are parasitized by Brown-headed Cowbirds in areas where there is no control of cowbirds by humans. Young: Fed by both parents. Young leave nest at age of 9 days; do not fly well at first. Parents continue to feed young up to 6 weeks. Usually 1 brood; rarely 2.,Mostly small insects; some berries. In summer; eats many insects; including sawfly adults and larvae; grasshopper nymphs; moths; and flies. Adults also feed on pine sap and blueberries. May feed soft berries to young. In winter in the Bahamas; feeds on insects and small fruits. ,Males arrive on breeding grounds in mid-May; a few days before the females; and establish large territories. Tend to be loosely colonial (lone pairs are rare); and males tend to return to the same colony in which they previously nested. Males sometimes have more than one mate. Nest: Placed on ground in sandy soil close to pine. Nest (built by female) is open cup made of grass; sedge; pine needles; oak leaves; lined with rootlets; hair; moss; and fibers. 
Kittlitzs-Murrelet,Brachyramphus brevirostris,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; glacier waters; nests on barren slopes in coastal mountains. Found on cold sea waters; mostly in calm; protected bays and among islands. Usually fairly close to shore. Nests on islands and mainland; on steep barren mountainsides; talus slopes; rock slides; sometimes near glaciers.,Forages while swimming underwater. Does most feeding in cold waters fairly close to shore; probably where relatively shallow.,One. Pale olive with brown and gray spots. Incubation probably by both sexes; but details (including length of incubation period) unknown. Young: Probably fed at nest site by parent(s) for at least 2-3 weeks. Some young then may travel along streams and rivers to reach sea; probably before old enough to fly strongly; others may fly directly from nest to ocean.,Not well known. Has a shorter bill than that of Marbled Murrelet; suggesting a different diet; known to eat small crustaceans; and possibly eats fewer fish than Marbled Murrelet. ,Solitary in breeding; on islands and mainland; few details known. Nest site is on ground on steep rocky slope with little vegetation; often 1000-3000' above sea level and several miles inland from ocean (can be more than 45 miles inland). Often at base of large rock; and may be fairly near stream flowing toward ocean. No nest built; egg laid on bare rock or ground. 
La-Sagras-Flycatcher,Myiarchus sagrae,Tyrant Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Ladder-backed-Woodpecker,Dryobates scalaris,Woodpeckers,Deserts; river woods; groves; dry woods; arid brush. In the United States in dry areas of southwest; including brushland; desert washes; mesquites; riverside trees in prairie country; towns. Moves into adjacent habitats such as oaks and pinyon-juniper stands in foothills; woods on Texas coast. In Central America also in thorn forest; pine-oak woods; even coastal mangroves.,Forages on trees; shrubs; cacti; tree yuccas; agave stalks; tall weeds; and sometimes on ground. Male and female often forage together; concentrating on different spots: male more on trunks and big limbs; female more on outer twigs; bushes; cacti. (Male is larger than female; with noticeably longer bill.),3-4; sometimes 2-7) white. Incubation is by both sexes; about 13 days. Young: Both parents feed the young; bringing insects in their bills to the nest. Age when young leave nest not well known.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a variety of insects; including beetles and their larvae; caterpillars; true bugs; ants. Also eats some berries and fruit; including cactus fruit. ,Pairs may remain more or less together throughout year. Displays (used mostly for territorial defense) include raising head feathers; bobbing and turning head; spreading of wings and tail; fluttering display flight. Nest site is cavity in tree (such as mesquite; hackberry; willow; oak) or in Joshua tree (a yucca) or agave stalk; sometimes in giant cactus; utility pole; fence post. Both sexes probably excavate but male may do most of work. Cavity usually 4-20' above ground; sometimes higher. 
Lanceolated-Warbler,Locustella lanceolata,Grassbirds and allies,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Lapland-Longspur,Calcarius lapponicus,Longspurs and Snow Buntings,In summer; tundra; in winter; fields; prairies. Breeds in various kinds of treeless Arctic habitats; from open wet tundra and sedge meadows to drier upland tundra. Winters in open country including shortgrass prairie; overgrazed pastures; stubble fields; plowed fields; lake shores; and similar areas.,Forages by walking on ground; searching methodically for food. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks; sometimes feeds in association with Horned Larks in winter.,4-6; sometimes 3-7. Greenish white to pale gray-green; marked with brown and black. Incubation is by female only; about 12-13 days. Male sometimes feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 8-10 days after hatching. Adults may split up the fledglings; each parent caring for only part of brood. 1 brood per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. Seeds make up about half of diet of adults in summer; and great majority of diet in winter; included are seeds of grasses; weeds; and sedges; also waste grain in winter. Also eats many insects in summer; including crane flies; other flies; beetles; caterpillars; true bugs; and others; as well as spiders. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Males arrive before females on the nesting grounds and establish territories with flight-song displays: flying up from ground to 30' or higher; then gliding down while singing. In courtship on ground; male may sing while running about with wings drooped; bill pointed up. In the short Arctic summer; with little time available; courtship and pairing are accomplished quickly; and females may begin nest-building within days after they arrive. Nest site is on ground; tucked into shallow depression in moss or other tundra vegetation. Nest (built by female) is cup of grass; sometimes with moss added; lined with fine grass and often with feathers. 
Lark-Bunting,Calamospiza melanocorys,New World Sparrows,Plains; prairies. Breeds mostly on native shortgrass prairie; also on sagebrush plains with understory of grass and weeds. During migration and winter; found in many kinds of open country; including prairies; agricultural fields; desert grassland; weedy vacant lots.,Forages mostly while running and walking on the ground; picking up items from soil or from plant stems. After flushing insects from ground; will pursue them in short flights. During migration and winter; almost always feeds in flocks; sometimes loosely associated with other seed-eating birds.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. Pale blue to greenish blue; usually unmarked; sometimes dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is mostly by female (male may help at times); 11-12 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young probably leave the nest about 9 days after hatching. 1 brood per year; sometimes 2.,Mostly insects and seeds. Summer diet is predominantly insects; especially grasshoppers; also beetles; true bugs; bees; ants; and many others. Also eats many seeds; especially in winter; mainly those of weeds and grasses; also some waste grain. ,Arrives on breeding grounds in flocks; then flocks break up and males set up territories. In courtship; male performs a flight song display: flies up to 20-30' above ground; then floats or flutters back to ground on outstretched wings; while singing. One male may have more than one mate. Nest site is on ground in grassy area; usually sheltered or protected by overhanging grass or weeds. Often sunken in small depression in soil; so that rim of nest is level with ground or only slightly above it. Nest is an open cup made of grass; weeds; rootlets; lined with fine grass; plant down; animal hair. 
Lark-Sparrow,Chondestes grammacus,New World Sparrows,Open country with bushes; trees; pastures; farms; roadsides. For nesting; generally favors areas with some open bare ground and some taller plants; included are overgrazed pastures; sandy barrens; hedgerows near fallow fields; brushy dry grasslands; sometimes open pinyon-juniper woods. In migration and winter; found in similar areas; also open weedy fields.,Does almost all its foraging while walking about on the ground in open areas. Typically forages in small; loose flocks.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Creamy to grayish white; spotted with brown and black. Incubation is by female; 11-12 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-10 days after hatching.,Mostly seeds and insects. Feeds heavily on seeds; especially in winter; including those of grasses and weeds as well as waste grain. Also eats many insects; especially in summer; including grasshoppers; beetles; caterpillars; and many others. Young are fed mostly insects; also some grass seeds. ,In courtship; male may strut about on the ground near the female; with his bill pointed up and his tail spread wide to show off the white corners. Nest: Both sexes may take part in choosing nest site; with male placing twigs at potential site; but female does actual building. Site varies; often on ground near base of tall weed; but may be up in shrubs or low trees; up to 7' above the ground; sometimes higher. Sometimes may nest in crevices in rocky cliffs. Nest is an open cup of grass; weeds; twigs; lined with fine grass; rootlets; animal hair. 
Laughing-Gull,Leucophaeus atricilla,Gulls and Terns,Salt marshes; coastal bays; piers; beaches; ocean. Generally found only in coastal regions; especially common around beaches and salt marshes; but also ranging several miles inland to rivers; fields; dumps. Found well inland in Florida and at Salton Sea; California. Nests on beaches and dredge spoil islands among grass and bushes.,Forages while walking; wading; or swimming; or may forage in flight by plunging into water or dipping to surface. May steal food from Brown Pelican; landing on pelican's head and snatching fish from larger bird's bill pouch.,3; sometimes 2-4. Olive to buff or brown; blotched with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; about 20 days. Young: Remain in nest for a few days after hatching; then wander nearby; hiding under vegetation. Both parents feed young; giving them half-digested food at first; solid food later. Age at first flight about 5 weeks.,Includes crustaceans; insects; fish. Diet varies with location and season. Eats many small fish; crustaceans; and insects; also earthworms; snails; refuse. In late spring; gathers to eat eggs of horseshoe crabs. Also eats eggs and sometimes young of other birds; especially Royal Terns. ,Breeds in colonies; sometimes with thousands of nests; sometimes associated with other species of gulls or terns. Nest site is on ground among grass or bushes. In more southerly areas; may be among denser growth; under shrubs or vines; perhaps for protection from sun. Nest (built by both sexes) may be a scrape in ground with sparse lining; or may be shallow cup of grass; sticks; debris; lined with finer grass. Adults may continue adding to nest during incubation. 
Lawrences-Goldfinch,Spinus lawrencei,Finches,Oak-pine woods; chaparral. Breeds locally in a variety of habitats including streamside trees; oak woodland; open pine woods; pinyon-juniper woods; chaparral. Often found close to water in fairly dry country. In migration and winter; occurs in weedy fields; farmland; brushy areas; streamsides.,Forages mostly in weeds; shrubs; and trees; often feeding quietly in a limited area; clambering about and occasionally hanging upside down to reach seeds. Sometimes feeds on the ground. Usually forages in flocks; even sometimes during nesting season.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Whitish to pale bluish-white; usually unmarked; sometimes with reddish spots. Incubation is by female only; probably about 12-13 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 11-13 days after hatching.,Mostly seeds; some insects. Feeds mostly on the seeds of native weeds and other plants; such as fiddleneck; peppergrass; and chamise. Also eats plant galls; buds; and some insects. Will come to feed on salt. ,Does not seem to defend territory strongly; sometimes nests in loose colonies. In courtship; male follows female; perches near her and sings. Nest site is usually about 15-20' above the ground in a tree such as oak; cypress; sycamore; or pine; sometimes lower in shrubs or up to 40' above the ground. Nest is a small open cup made of grass; flower heads; plant down; feathers; animal hair. Female builds nest; male often accompanies her and may carry some material; but rarely provides any real help. 
Laysan-Albatross,Phoebastria immutabilis,Albatrosses,Open ocean. Generally forages far from land; beyond continental shelf; and mainly over cold waters. Nests on open sandy or grassy areas on low; flat islands.,Forages by seizing prey near water's surface while swimming. Does much feeding at night (when squid are closer to surface); and eyes are adapted for night vision.,One. Creamy white; spotted with brown. Incubation (by both sexes) averages 64-65 days. Young:  For 12-24 days after egg hatches; one parent stays with young while other forages for food. Nestling fed by regurgitation; by both parents. Period from hatching to departure from island averages about 165 days.,Mostly squid. Small squid are apparently staple fare; as they are for some larger albatrosses of southern hemisphere. Also eats fish and fish eggs; crustaceans; some carrion and refuse. ,First breeds at age of 7-9 years. Breeding season in Hawaii extends from November to July. Elaborate courtship "dance;" performed only by first-time breeders and pre-breeders; includes many movements including bowing head; mutual preening; swinging head from side to side; pointing bill straight up while calling. Nest:  Site is on open ground; preferably close to taller vegetation. Nest (begun by female; finished by both sexes) is shallow depression in ground; surrounded by built-up rim. 
Lazuli-Bunting,Passerina amoena,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Open brush; streamside shrubs. Breeds in brushy areas with open grassy ground nearby; such as patches of scrub oak; chaparral; streamside thickets; sometimes in areas of sagebrush or pinyon-juniper woods. In migration and winter; occurs in weedy fields; open woods; brushy places.,Forages mainly on the ground; also up in low growth. May bend grass stalks down to the ground to eat the seeds from them. Sometimes takes insects from foliage while hovering.,3-5; usually 4. Pale bluish white; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 12 days. Young: At some nests; nestlings are fed entirely by the female; although at others the male helps to feed them. Young leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching. Male may feed the young more after they fledge; while female begins second nesting attempt. 2 broods per year; perhaps sometimes 3.,Mostly seeds and insects. More than half of summer diet may be insects; including grasshoppers; caterpillars; beetles; true bugs; wild bees; ants; and others. Also eats many seeds; mainly those of grasses; also weed seeds and waste grain; seeds may make up most of winter diet. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. Where Lazuli and Indigo buntings overlap in range; they will defend territories against each other. Nest: Placed in shrubs; vines; or low trees; usually 2-4' above the ground; firmly attached to vertical stems or to forked branch. Nest (built by female) is an open cup of grass; weeds; leaves; lined with fine grass and sometimes animal hair. 
Leachs-Storm-Petrel,Hydrobates leucorhous,Northern Storm-Petrels,Open ocean; nesting colonies in turf on offshore islands. Widespread at sea; concentrating around upwellings and areas where cold and warm currents meet. Forages over continental shelf but also far out to sea; off Pacific Coast; generally seen farther offshore than other storm-petrels. Nests on islands with soil for nesting burrows.,Forages mostly by hovering or skimming low over water and taking items from surface. Seldom sits on water to feed. May feed by day or night. Sometimes associated with feeding whales or seals.,One. White; some with band of purplish dots toward large end. Incubation is by both sexes; 38-46 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation; visiting at night. Feeding rate declines as young matures. Period from hatching to young bird's departure from nest is about 9-10 weeks.,Mostly crustaceans. Feeds mainly on small crustaceans; including euphausiid shrimp; amphipods; copepods; larval stages of spiny lobster; also small squid; possibly some small fish. Scavenges at slicks of oil and fat on sea surface. ,First breeds at age of 4 or 5 years. Nests in colonies on islands; coming ashore only at night. Nest:  Site is in burrow under grass; rocks; or tree roots; burrow is usually 1-3' long; sometimes more than 5'. Male digs burrow; mostly using feet. Several burrow entrances may be very close together; or several nests may be in side branches of one tunnel. May also use natural holes and crevices at times. Nest chamber usually lined with leaves; grass. 
Least-Auklet,Aethia pusilla,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; northern islands. May forage close to shore or far out at sea. Favors areas with turbulent water; upwellings; strong gradients of water temperature or salinity; edges of currents; or tide rips. Nests on islands in boulder fields; talus slopes; lava flows; rock crevices.,Forages while swimming underwater. Fast and agile underwater but probably not able to dive very deep.,One. White; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; 25-39 days; usually about 30 days. Young: Both parents feed young; bringing food to nest in throat pouch. Young develops faster than young of most auks; leaves nest 25-33 days after hatching.,Crustaceans and other marine invertebrates. Diet in summer is small creatures that occur in swarms in cold waters; mostly very small crustaceans known as calanoid copepods; also some euphausiid shrimp; amphipods; others. Diet at other seasons not well known. ,First breeds at age of 3 years. In courtship; male perches upright and makes chattering calls; female approaches in exaggerated stretching and crouching postures; then both birds engage in bill-touching and chattering in duet. Pair-bond often lasts more than one season. Nest: In colonies located in talus slopes; rock piles; other areas with abundant small rock crevices for nest sites. No nest built; egg laid on bare rock; soil; or pebbles. Pair may re-use nest site for several years. 
Least-Bittern,Ixobrychus exilis,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Fresh marshes; reedy ponds. Mostly freshwater marsh but also brackish marsh; in areas with tall; dense vegetation standing in water. May be over fairly deep water; because it mostly climbs in reeds rather than wading. Sometimes in salt marsh or in mangroves.,Searches for food by clambering about in vegetation above water; and jabbing downward with its long bill to capture prey at the water's surface. Sometimes flicks its wings open and shut; which may startle prey into motion. At especially good feeding sites; it may bend down reeds to build a hunting platform for itself.,4-5; sometimes 2-7. Pale green or blue. Incubation is by both sexes; 17-20 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. In response to predators near nest; adult bird may make itself look larger by fluffing out its feathers and partially spreading wings. Legs and feet of young develop quickly; and young may leave nest as early as 6 days after hatching if disturbed; ordinarily remain in nest for about 2 weeks; and near nest for another week or more. 1 or 2 broods per year.,Mostly fish and insects. Eats mostly small fish (such as minnows; sunfishes; and perch) and large insects (dragonflies and others); also crayfish; leeches; frogs; tadpoles; small snakes; and other items. ,Nests are usually widely scattered in marsh; but sometimes in loose colonies. In one South Carolina study; Least Bitterns often nested in close association with Boat-tailed Grackles. Nest:  Site is well concealed in tall marsh growth. Nest (built mostly by male) is platform created by bending down marsh vegetation; adding sticks and grass on top. 
Least-Flycatcher,Empidonax minimus,Tyrant Flycatchers,Open woods; aspen groves; orchards; shade trees. Breeds in deciduous or mixed woodlands; seldom in purely coniferous groves. Usually around clearings or edges; but sometimes in the interior of dry woods. Winters in the tropics around woodland edges and second growth.,Forages by watching from a perch and flying out to catch insects. Often perches on dead twigs within the middle to lower levels of trees; in fairly open spots. Catches most insects in mid-air; but also takes food (including caterpillars and spiders) from foliage while hovering.,4; sometimes 3; occasionally 5. Creamy white. Incubation is by female only; 13-15 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 12-17 days; may be fed by parents for another 2-3 weeks after fledging.,Mostly insects. Summer diet is mostly insects; including many small wasps; winged ants; beetles; caterpillars; midges; and flies; with smaller numbers of true bugs; grasshoppers; and others. Also eats spiders; and occasionally a few berries. ,May nest in loose colonies. Courtship behavior not well known; but may involve male chasing female through the trees. Least Flycatchers often actively chase American Redstarts out of nesting territory. Nest site is usually in deciduous sapling or small tree such as maple; birch; or ash; placed in a vertical fork in a branch. May be 2-65' above ground; but heights usually average 12-25' up; varying with habitat. Nest (evidently built by female only) is a tidy cup of grass; strips of bark; twigs; lichens; plant fibers; often bound together with webs of spiders or caterpillars; lined with fine grass; plant down; animal hair; feathers. 
Least-Grebe,Tachybaptus dominicus,Grebes,Ponds; marshes. In Texas usually on shallow freshwater ponds and ditches; either fairly open or with heavy marsh vegetation. Often appears on small temporary ponds after rainy periods. In tropics; also on brackish marshes; lakes; slow-moving rivers; mangrove swamps.,Forages in several ways. Dives and swims underwater in pursuit of prey; captures insects on and above surface of water or takes them from waterside vegetation. May catch flying dragonflies by approaching them underwater and then erupting from beneath water's surface to snatch them from the air.,4-6; rarely 3-7. Whitish to very pale blue-green; becoming stained in nest. Incubation (by both sexes) about 21 days. Young:  Can swim soon after hatching. Small young often ride on parents' backs; fed by both parents. Young may return to nest for sleeping and resting during first 2 weeks after hatching. Age at first flight not known. May raise 2-3 broods per year (possibly more in tropics).,Mostly insects. Feeds on wide variety of insects; including aquatic beetles; waterbugs; dragonfly larvae and adults; and others. Also small crustaceans; spiders; tadpoles; small fish. ,In Texas; breeds mainly spring and summer; sometimes at other seasons; nests year-round in the tropics. Courtship displays not well known; may include pair rising to upright position and gliding rapidly across surface of water. Nest:  Site is in shallow water; usually 1-3' deep. Nest (built by both sexes) is a mass of decaying vegetation; either floating or resting on bottom; anchored to aquatic plants. Same nest often re-used for subsequent broods. 
Least-Sandpiper,Calidris minutilla,Sandpipers,Mudflats; grassy marshes; rainpools; shores. In migration; often more common inland than on coast; favoring muddy edges of marshes; ponds; rivers; sometimes in flooded fields or damp meadows. On coast; usually avoids sandy beaches and wide-open tidal flats; being found instead on narrow tidal creeks and edge of salt marsh. Breeds on tundra; sedge meadows; northern bogs.,Forages mostly by walking slowly and picking up tiny items from surface of ground. Sometimes probes in mud for food.,4; rarely 3. Pale buff; blotched with shades of brown. Incubation is by both sexes; with female incubating at night and early morning; male most of day at first. In later stages; male may do most or all of incubating. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Young are usually tended by both parents at first; but female usually deserts them before male does; sometimes departing even before eggs hatch; male typically stays with young at least until they can fly. Young feed themselves; can fly about 14-16 days after hatching.,Tiny crustaceans; insects; snails. Diet varies with season and place. On breeding grounds; may feed mostly on larvae of various flies. During migration on coast; may feed mostly on small crustaceans called amphipods and isopods; in inland areas; may eat mostly insects. Diet also includes small snails; marine worms; seeds. In spring on Atlantic Coast; may join other shorebirds in feeding on eggs of horseshoe crab. ,In display flight over breeding territory; male circles with alternating flutters and glides; while singing. During courtship on ground; male approaches female; leaning forward with tail lifted; sometimes raising one or both wings over his back. Nest site is on ground near water; usually in clump of grass or on hummock of moss. Nest (begun by male; completed by female) is shallow depression lined with bits of grass; leaves; moss. 
Least-Storm-Petrel,Hydrobates microsoma,Northern Storm-Petrels,Open ocean. Favors warm waters; more likely to move north along California coast in years when water temperature is higher. Generally over continental shelf; and may occur closer to shore than some other storm-petrels; often being seen from shore in Mexico. Nests on rocky islands.,forages mostly by fluttering low over water and taking items from surface. Seldom sits on water to feed.,One. White. Incubation probably by both sexes. Young:  Probably both parents feed young.,probably tiny crustaceans and other very small marine life. Diet very poorly known; presumably feeds mainly on zooplankton (general term for tiny creatures floating in water). Once reported to feed on larval stages of spiny lobster. ,Nesting behavior poorly known. Breeds in colonies on islands off northwestern Mexico. At San Benito Island; many nests reported to have eggs during July. Active around nesting colonies only at night. Makes whirring calls from inside nest. Nest:  Site is reported to be usually among piles of rocks; or in crevices in cliffs. Apparently not in burrows as in many other storm-petrels. Several pairs may nest close together if good sites are clustered. No nest built; egg laid on bare rock. 
Least-Tern,Sternula antillarum,Gulls and Terns,Sea beaches; bays; large rivers; salt flats. Along coast generally where sand beaches close to extensive shallow waters for feeding. Inland; found along rivers with broad exposed sandbars; lakes with salt flats nearby. In winter found along tropical coasts; sometimes well out to sea.,Forages by flying over water; hovering; and plunging to catch prey just below water's surface. Sometimes dips down to take prey from surface of water or land; and may catch insects in flight.,1-3; perhaps rarely more. Buff to pale green; blotched with black; brown; gray. Incubation is by both sexes; female may do more in early stages; male more later. In very hot weather; adult may dip into water and wet belly feathers to cool eggs. Incubation period 20-25 days. Young: Leave nest a few days after hatching; find places to hide nearby. Both parents feed young. Age at first flight about 19-20 days; young may remain with parents another 2-3 months. One brood per year; sometimes two in south.,Fish; crustaceans; insects. Diet varies with season and location; mostly small fish; crustaceans; and insects; also some small mollusks and marine worms. ,Nests in colonies; sometimes in isolated pairs. In courtship; male (carrying fish in bill) flies upward; followed by female; then both glide down. On ground; displays include courtship feeding. Nest site is on open ground (or on gravel roof). Nest is shallow scrape; sometimes lined with pebbles; grass; debris. 
LeContes-Sparrow,Ammospiza leconteii,New World Sparrows,Tall grass; weedy hayfields; marshes. Breeds in wet meadows or the edges of marshes; in areas with damp soil or very shallow water and dense growth of grass; sedges; or rushes. Winters mostly in damp weedy fields; shallow freshwater marshes; coastal prairies.,Does its foraging on or near the ground; often feeding on the ground under dense cover; sometimes moving about in low vegetation seeking insects. Almost always forages alone.,3-5; usually 4. Grayish white; spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by female only; probably about 12-13 days. Young: Nestlings are fed by the female and possibly by the male. The age at which the young leave the nest is not well known.,Mostly insects and seeds. Diet is not well known; but apparently eats mostly insects in summer; mostly seeds in winter. Eats caterpillars; leafhoppers; stink bugs; and many other insects; as well as spiders. Also eats seeds of grasses and weeds. Young are fed almost exclusively on insects. ,Nesting behavior is not well known; partly because the nests are very difficult to find. Male defends nesting territory by singing from a perch within tall grass; may sing by day or night. Nest site is usually a few inches above the ground; sometimes on the ground; well hidden in areas with large amounts of dead grass; rushes; or sedges remaining from preceding seasons. The nest (probably built by the female); attached to standing stems; is an open cup of grass and rushes; lined with fine grass and sometimes with animal hair. 
LeContes-Thrasher,Toxostoma lecontei,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Desert flats with sparse growth of saltbush. Lives in more open habitats than other thrashers; on dry flats with only scattered low shrubs. Found especially in areas of sparse saltbush; also on creosote bush flats in some areas; mainly where there are a few slightly larger mesquites or cholla cactus.,Forages almost entirely on the ground; walking and running rapidly on bare open soil. Finds much of its food by digging in the soil with its bill.,3-4; sometimes 2. Pale greenish blue; lightly dotted with brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 15 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 13-17 days after hatching. 2 broods per year; perhaps rarely 3.,Mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; but feeds mainly on insects; including grasshoppers; ants; beetles; and many others. Also eats spiders; centipedes; and other arthropods; and sometimes small lizards; eats a few berries and seeds. ,May mate for life. Pairs remain together at all seasons on permanent territories. In courtship; male may present female with twig or insect. Male sings to defend territory; beginning in mid-winter; nesting may begin in February or even January; but lasts until June in some areas. Nest: Usually placed less than 5' above the ground. Low; dense cholla cactus favored as nest sites; will also nest in saltbush; mesquite; or other low shrubs. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky open cup of thorny twigs; lined with rootlets; leaves; plant fibers; sometimes with softer inner lining of plant down. 
Lesser-Black-backed-Gull,Larus fuscus,Gulls and Terns,Beaches; bays; coasts; garbage dumps. Mostly along coast; including bays; estuaries; coastal islands; also around lakes inland; especially Great Lakes and elsewhere in northeast. Concentrates around sources of food; such as garbage dumps; fishing harbors.,Forages by swooping down to sea surface in flight; or picks up items while swimming; walking; or wading. May steal food from other birds.,(3; sometimes 1-4) brown or olive to blue-green; usually blotched with dark brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 24-27 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Downy young may leave nest after a few days; but remain in vicinity. Age at first flight about 30-40 days.,Omnivorous. Diet includes a wide variety of fish; insects; mollusks; crustaceans; marine worms; small birds; nestlings; eggs; rodents; also eats berries; seeds; seaweed. Also scavenges refuse around garbage dumps. ,Not yet established as a nesting bird in North America; although single birds have paired up with Herring Gulls at a couple of colonies. Usually first breeds at age of 4 years. Nests in colonies. Nest site on ground; sometimes on cliff ledge or on roof of building. Nest (built by both sexes) a mound of grasses; seaweed; debris; with shallow depression at top lined with finer materials. 
Lesser-Goldfinch,Spinus psaltria,Finches,Open brushy country; open woods; wooded streams; gardens. Generally in semi-open areas; where there are thickets and trees close to open weedy fields; from low valleys to high in mountains. In dry country; usually found close to water. In the tropics; found in semi-open terrain; woodland edges.,Forages actively and acrobatically in trees; shrubs; and weeds. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Pale blue to pale blue-green; usually unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 12 days. Male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which young leave nest is not well known. 2 broods per year; perhaps sometimes 3.,Mostly seeds; some insects. Majority of diet at all seasons consists of seeds. Especially favors those of the daisy (composite) family; such as thistle and wild sunflower; also seeds of various weeds. Also feeds on flowers and buds of trees (such as cottonwoods) and on some berries. Eats some insects; especially in summer; mainly small ones such as aphids. Will feed on salt. ,In warmer parts of Southwest; breeding season may extend over much of year from early spring to mid-autumn. In courtship; male feeds female; performs display flight with wings and tail spread widely; fluttering rapidly while singing. Nest: Usually placed in vertical fork of twigs in shrub or tree; 5-30' above the ground; sometimes higher in tree or very low in bushes or dense weeds. Nest (built mostly or entirely by female) is a compact open cup woven of grass; plant fibers; strips of bark; lined with plant down. 
Lesser-Nighthawk,Chordeiles acutipennis,Nightjars,Arid scrub; dry grassland; desert washes. Found in open arid habitats including desert; grassland; brushy country. Where it overlaps locally with the Common Nighthawk in the southwest; the Lesser is more common at lower elevations and in drier country.,Forages most actively near dusk; also at night and sometimes by day. Forages mostly in flight; usually flying fairly low; scooping up flying insects in its wide mouth. Also may feed by sitting on the ground at night and fluttering up to catch insects as they pass. Will feed around bright lights at night; taking the insects attracted there.,2. White to pale gray; finely dotted with gray; brown; and lavender. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 18-19 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitating insects. If approached; adults put on "broken wing" act to lure intruders away; in case of disturbance; young often move to new spot; able to crawl over ground with surprising speed. Age of young at first flight probably about 3 weeks.,Insects. Feeds mainly on flying insects; including beetles; moths; grasshoppers; and many others. Will feed heavily on swarms of winged ants or termites. ,In courtship; male flies about with stiff wingbeats; following female; his white throat puffed out conspicuously as he gives trilling calls. Nest site is on ground; sometimes in shade of small shrub but often in fully exposed open spot. Sometimes on roof of building. No nest built; eggs laid on bare dirt or gravel. 
Lesser-Prairie-Chicken,Tympanuchus pallidicinctus,Pheasants and Grouse,Sandhill country; sage and bluestem grass; oak shinnery. Found in sandy short-grass prairie regions with scattered shrubs such as sand sage. Often found around stands of low; scrubby oaks (Havard and Mohr's oak; also called "shin oak"). Regularly comes to agricultural fields to feed on waste grain; but disappears from areas where too much of native prairie is taken over by farmland.,Forages mostly on ground; sometimes above ground in oaks. May move several miles every day from roosting areas to good feeding sites.,usually 11-13. Whitish to pale buff; finely speckled with brown and olive. Incubation is by female only; 22-24 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Female tends young; but young feed themselves. Young are able to make short flights at age of 1-2 weeks; but are not full-grown for several more weeks.,Includes seeds; acorns; insects; leaves. Diet varies with season. Eats seeds and leaves of a wide variety of plants; including oak leaves and acorns. May eat much waste grain around agricultural fields in fall and winter. Eats many insects; including grasshoppers and beetles; especially in summer. Also eats some flowers; twigs; oak galls. ,In spring; at dawn and again in evening; males gather on "booming grounds" and display there to attract females. Booming ground on slight rise or level open ground; with good visibility. In display; male raises feather tufts on neck; stamps feet rapidly while making hollow gobbling sounds; may leap in the air with loud cackles. Female visits booming ground; mates with one of the males. Nest site is on ground; usually under a shrub or clump of grass. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression lined with a few bits of grass; weeds. 
Lesser-Sand-Plover,Charadrius mongolus,Plovers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Lesser-Scaup,Aythya affinis,Ducks and Geese,Marsh ponds (summer); lakes; bays; estuaries. Summers around large marshes in prairie or forested regions. Winters on lakes; reservoirs; rivers; sheltered areas of coastal bays. Overlaps extensively with Greater Scaup; especially in winter; but at that season the Lesser is far more likely to be found on freshwater lakes and ponds well inland.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; sometimes by dabbling or up-ending in shallow water. Sometimes feeds at night.,9-11; sometimes 8-14. Olive-buff. Incubation is by female only; 21-27 days. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching; go to water. Young are tended by female but feed themselves. 2 or more broods of young may join under care of several adult females. Age at first flight 47-54 days after hatching.,Includes mollusks; plant material. Diet varies with season and habitat; but animal matter may predominate; especially mollusks such as clams and snails; also aquatic insects; crustaceans. Also eats plant material such as stems and leaves of sea lettuce; pondweeds; wild celery; plus seeds of pondweeds; sedges; grasses; and others. Birds on the Great Lakes may feed heavily on the introduced zebra mussel. ,Probably first breeds at age of 2 years in most cases. Elements of courtship display by male include a shake of the head; followed by throwing the head far back and bringing it forward very quickly; exaggerated bowing movements; ritualized preening. Some displays may be performed underwater. Nest site is usually on dry land close to water; often on islands in lakes; surrounded by good cover of vegetation. Stands of bulrush in marshes especially favored. Nest is a slight depression with addition of some dry grass; lined with down. 
Lesser-Yellowlegs,Tringa flavipes,Sandpipers,Marshes; mudflats; shores; ponds; in summer; open boreal woods. Occurs widely in migration; including coastal estuaries; salt and fresh marshes; edges of lakes and ponds; typically more common on freshwater habitats. Often in same places as Greater Yellowlegs; but may be less frequent on tidal flats. Breeds in large clearings; such as burned areas; near ponds in northern forest.,Typically forages in very shallow water; picking at items on or just below water's surface. Sometimes swings its head back and forth with the tip of the bill in the water.,4; sometimes 3. Buff to yellowish or gray; blotched with brown. Incubation is probably by both parents; roughly 22-23 days. Young: Downy young are able to leave nest soon after hatching; are tended by both parents; but feed themselves. Age at first flight probably about 18-20 days.,Insects; small fish; crustaceans. Eats many aquatic insects; including beetles; water boatmen; dragonfly nymphs; crane fly larvae; and others; also terrestrial insects. Also feeds on crustaceans; snails; worms; small fish. Insects make up most of diet in summer. ,Nesting behavior not well known. On the breeding territory; male performs a rising and falling display flight; while giving a ringing song that can be heard from some distance. Adults may perch on top of dead trees and call; especially when humans intrude on territory. Nest site is on ground in open; typically in dry site and sometimes far from water; may be placed close to log; burned stump; brushpile. Nest is a shallow depression; sparsely lined with leaves; grass. 
Lewiss-Woodpecker,Melanerpes lewis,Woodpeckers,Scattered or logged forest; river groves; burns; foothills. Because of aerial foraging; needs open country in summer; with large trees for nest sites and foraging perches. Often in cottonwood groves; open pine-oak woods; burned or cut-over woods. Winter habitat chosen in autumn for food supply; usually groves of oaks; sometimes date palms; orchards of pecans; walnuts; almonds; fruit.,During spring and summer; forages mainly by catching insects in flight: sallying forth from a perch or circling high in air to catch flying insects; or swooping down to catch those on the ground. Also gleans some insects from tree surfaces; and takes small fruits in trees. During fall; harvests acorns or other nuts; breaks them into pieces by pounding with bill; then stores them in bark crevices or holes in trees; to feed on them during winter.,6-7; sometimes 4-9. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with males incubating at night and part of day); 12-16 days. Young: Both parents bring back insects in bill to feed nestlings. Young leave nest 4-5 weeks after hatching; remain with parents for some time thereafter.,Mostly insects; nuts; fruits. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; also eats fruits and berries; plus acorns and other nuts. ,Pairs may mate for life; and may use the same nest site repeatedly. Displays (used in both aggression and courtship) include perching with wings spread; head lowered; neck feathers ruffed out; floating circular flight around nest tree. Nest site is cavity excavated in tree (tree or limb usually dead); sometimes in utility pole; at site apparently chosen by male. Height of nest varies; from 5' to well over 100' above ground; probably usually lower than 60'. 
Lilac-crowned-Parrot,Amazona finschi,African and New World Parrots,Deciduous and semi-deciduous forests along the Mexican coast; as well as pine-oak forests.Residential and suburban area in California; sometimes in native oaks. Has nested in native coniferous forest in the San Gabriel Mountains. Also found in Florida. Not abundant in any of these areas.,NA,NA,NA,Pacific coastal forests in humid valleys at 600-1000 m are optimal nesting habitat; providing important food resources during the dry season.
Limpkin,Aramus guarauna,Limpkins,Fresh swamps; marshes. In Florida; found in open fresh-water marshes; along the shores of ponds and lakes; and in wooded swamps along rivers and near springs; locally in river swamps in Georgia. Throughout most of its tropical range; its habitat and distribution are dictated by the presence of apple snails (Pomacea).,Forages by walking in shallow water; searching for snails visually; also by probing in mud and among floating vegetation. May feed at night; especially on moonlit nights. Moves to solid ground to remove snail from shell or to pound mussel open. The tip of the bill usually curves slightly to the right; which may help in removing snail from curved shell. The bill also usually has a slight gap just behind the tips of the mandibles; which may help in carrying and manipulating the snails.,Usually 4-8. Olive to buff; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is by both sexes; but incubation period not well known. Young: Downy young leave the nest within a day after hatching; and follow one or both parents. Probably both parents feed young. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Large snails. Eats mostly large apple snails (genus Pomacea). In Florida; will also eat other kinds of snails and mussels; also sometimes insects; crustaceans; worms; frogs; lizards. ,Breeding behavior not well known. May nest in loose colonies where food is abundant. Nest site for nest varies; may be on ground near water; in marsh grass just above water; or in shrubs or trees above or near water; up to 20' high or sometimes much higher. Nest is a platform of reeds and grass; lined with finer plant material. 
Lincolns-Sparrow,Melospiza lincolnii,New World Sparrows,Willow and alder thickets; muskeg; brushy bogs. In winter; thickets; weeds; bushes. Breeds in northern and mountainous areas in dense low vegetation near water; such as streamside willow groves; bushy edges of bogs; brushy clearings in wet coniferous forest. Winters in dense thickets; overgrown fields.,Forages mostly while hopping on the ground; typically under or close to dense thickets.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Pale green to greenish white; heavily spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; about 12-14 days. Female may remain on nest until approached very closely; then scurry away over the ground like a rodent. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-12 days after hatching; may be tended by the parents for another 2-3 weeks or more.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including caterpillars; beetles; moths; ants; flies; and many others; also spiders and millipedes. Seeds probably make up majority of diet; especially in winter; included are seeds of weeds and grasses. Young are probably fed entirely on insects  ,Male defends nesting territory by singing. In some areas; may compete with Song Sparrows for territories; but Song Sparrows usually dominate. Nest site is on the ground; very well hidden under clump of grass or under dense shrubbery; often sunken in a depression in sphagnum moss or other ground cover. Nest (built by female only) is a shallow open cup of grasses or sedges; lined with fine grass and sometimes with animal hair. 
Little-Blue-Heron,Egretta caerulea,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Marshes; swamps; rice fields; ponds; shores. In North America most numerous on fresh waters inland; around river swamps and marshy lakes. Also feeds in wet meadows and even dry fields. Less commonly feeds in salt water; although it may favor such habitat in the Caribbean. Nests in trees or in dense low thickets near water.,Usually slow and methodical in its foraging; walking very slowly in shallows or standing still waiting for prey to approach. May feed in shallow water or on shore; also in grassy fields.,3-5; sometimes 1-6. Pale blue-green. Incubation is by both sexes; 20-23 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young may climb out of nest onto nearby branches after 2-3 weeks; are capable of short flights at 4 weeks; become independent at 6-7 weeks.,Mainly fish and crustaceans. Diet quite variable. Eats mostly small fish (including larger ones than those favored by similar-sized Snowy Egret) and crustaceans; including crabs and crayfish. Away from water eats many grasshoppers and other insects. Other food items include tadpoles; frogs; lizards; snakes; turtles; spiders. ,Breeds in colonies. Male establishes small territory within colony and displays there; driving away other males. Displays by male include neck-stretching and bill-snapping; pairs in courtship may nibble at each other's plumage; and cross and intertwine necks. Nest:  Site is in a tree or shrub; usually 3-15' above ground or water; sometimes up to 40' high. Nest (built by both sexes) is a platform of sticks; varying from flimsy to substantial; with depression in the center. 
Little-Bunting,Emberiza pusilla,Old World Buntings,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Little-Curlew,Numenius minutus,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Little-Egret,Egretta garzetta,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Little-Gull,Hydrocoloeus minutus,Gulls and Terns,Lakes; bays. In summer mostly inland around low marshy areas near lakes; also fresh or brackish marshes close to coast. Winters along coast; concentrating at protected shallow estuaries; mudflats; beaches; fresh ponds close to shore.,Often forages by flying rather slowly and low; dipping to surface of water or land to pick up items. May land on water to feed; sometimes wades in shallow water.,2-3; sometimes 1-5. Olive to buff; marked with brown and gray. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-25 days. Young: Are tended and fed by both parents; may leave nest when a few days old; but remain in general area. Young capable of flight at 21-24 days; may leave nest area with parents but become independent soon thereafter.,Mostly insects. During summer and migration feeds mostly on insects. Also eats brine shrimp and other crustaceans; small mollusks; spiders; marine worms; and some small fish. ,Breeds in colonies; those in North America usually small; sometimes isolated pairs. In courtship; 2 birds may walk around each other; heads tilted away; then go through ritualized preening or pecking at ground. Nest site is on ground near water. Nest (built by both sexes) is a shallow depression lined with grass; leaves; weeds; may be more built up if on wet ground. 
Little-Stint,Calidris minuta,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Loggerhead-Kingbird,Tyrannus caudifasciatus,Tyrant Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Loggerhead-Shrike,Lanius ludovicianus,Shrikes,Semi-open country with lookout posts; wires; trees; scrub. Breeds in any kind of semi-open terrain; from large clearings in wooded regions to open grassland or desert with a few scattered trees or large shrubs. In winter; may be in totally treeless country if fences or wires provide hunting perches.,Forages mostly by watching from an exposed perch; then swooping down to take prey on or near ground or from low vegetation. Kills its prey using its hooked bill. Often stores uneaten prey by impaling it on thorn or barbed wire; returning to eat it later.,5-6; sometimes 4-8. Grayish white to pale buff; with spots of brown and gray often concentrated at large end. Incubation is by female; about 16-17 days. Male feeds female during incubation (sometimes bringing her food he has stored on thorns earlier). Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest at about 17-21 days; are tended by parents for another 3-4 weeks.,Mostly large insects; also rodents and small birds. Diet in summer is mainly insects; especially grasshoppers and crickets; also beetles; wasps; and others. Eats mice and other rodents at all seasons; especially in winter; and eats small birds. Also sometimes included in diet are spiders; snails; frogs; lizards; snakes; crayfish; small fish; and other items. ,In many regions; nesting begins quite early in spring. In courtship; male performs short flight displays; male feeds female. Nest: Placed in a dense (and often thorny) tree or shrub; usually 5-30' above the ground; occasionally higher; in a spot well hidden by foliage. Nest (built by both sexes) is a solidly constructed but bulky cup of twigs; grass; weeds; strips of bark; lined with softer materials such as rootlets; animal hair; feathers; plant down. 
Long-billed-Curlew,Numenius americanus,Sandpipers,High plains; rangeland. In winter; also cultivated land; tideflats; salt marshes. Breeding habitat is mostly native dry grassland and sagebrush prairie; may favor areas with some damp low spots nearby; to provide better feeding area for the young. May nest in pastures that are not too heavily grazed; rarely in agricultural fields. In migration and winter often in farm fields; marshes; coastal mudflats; in addition to grasslands.,Forages by walking rather quickly over grassland or mudflats; using long bill to reach ahead and pick up insects or to probe just below the surface of mud or soil. On coastal mudflats; often probes into small burrows for mud crabs; ghost shrimps; and other creatures.,4; rarely 3-5. Pale buff to olive-buff; evenly spotted with brown and dark olive. Incubation is by both parents; 27-30 days. Incubating bird may sit motionless on nest even if approached closely. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young; often leading them to marshy or damp area for better feeding; young feed themselves. Age of young at first flight varies; 32-45 days.,Mostly insects. On grasslands; feeds mostly on insects; including beetles; grasshoppers; caterpillars; many others; also eats spiders; toads; and sometimes the eggs and young of other birds. May eat many berries at times. In coastal areas; also eats crabs; crayfish; mollusks; marine worms; other large invertebrates. ,Male displays over nesting territory with spectacular undulating flight; fluttering higher and then gliding lower; while giving loud ringing calls. Nest site is on ground on open prairie; usually in rather dry surroundings. On mostly featureless terrain; often chooses site close to conspicuous rock; shrub; pile of cow manure; or other object. Nest is shallow scrape in ground; usually with sparse lining of grass; weeds; may have slight rim built up around edge. 
Long-billed-Dowitcher,Limnodromus scolopaceus,Sandpipers,Mudflats; shallow pools; margins; mostly on fresh water. Even in coastal regions; migrants and wintering birds tend to occur on freshwater habitats; such as ponds; impoundments; upper reaches of estuaries. Sometimes out on open tidal flats with Short-billed Dowitchers. Breeds in far north on wet; hummocky tundra.,Typically forages by wading in shallow water (sometimes walking on wet mud); probing deeply in the mud with its bill. Usually deliberate in its feeding; standing in one spot or moving forward slowly.,4; sometimes 3. Olive to brown; marked with brown. Incubation is by both sexes at first; then mostly or entirely by male in later stages. Incubation period 20-22 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Female reportedly departs near the time the eggs hatch; leaving male to care for young. Young find all their own food; development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Small aquatic invertebrates. Diet probably varies with season. Particularly on breeding grounds; eats many insects and their larvae; including many flies; beetles; others. In migration and winter also eats mollusks; marine worms; crustaceans. At times; may feed heavily on seeds of grasses; bulrushes; pondweeds; other plants. ,Breeding range is mostly in Arctic coastal regions; generally farther north and west than that of Short-billed Dowitcher. Nest site is on ground; usually near water; often on raised hummock or tussock in wet meadow. Nest is a depression sparsely lined with sedges; grasses; bottom of nest is often wet. 
Long-billed-Murrelet,Brachyramphus perdix,Auks; Murres; Puffins,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Long-billed-Thrasher,Toxostoma longirostre,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Woodland undergrowth; mesquites. In Texas; found in the brushy undergrowth of native woodlands of hackberry; acacia; ebony; and other trees; especially near water; and in dense thickets of mesquite and other thorny shrubs. In Mexico; lives in various kinds of woodland and semi-open areas.,Does much foraging on the ground; using its long bill to flip dead leaves aside as it rummages in the leaf-litter for insects; also will use its bill to dig in soil within an inch of the surface. Perches in shrubs and trees to eat berries.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale blue to bluish white; finely dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 12-14 days after hatching. Probably 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Diet is not known in detail; but probably similar to that of Brown Thrasher. Known to eat many insects; including beetles; ants; true bugs; moths; grasshoppers; antlions; and others; also spiders and centipedes; probably small vertebrates such as frogs and lizards. Also eats many berries and wild fruits; and probably some seeds. ,Pairs may remain together at all seasons; at least in some cases. Nest: Placed in dense and often spiny plants such as shrubby mesquite; acacia; prickly-pear; or yucca; usually 4-10' above the ground. Site is usually well shaded in undergrowth of woods and in an almost impenetrable position. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a bulky and loosely-constructed open cup of sticks; twigs; leaves; weeds; grass; and other material; lined with softer matter such as rootlets and fine grass. 
Long-eared-Owl,Asio otus,Superb Owls,Woodlands; conifer groves. Favored habitat includes dense trees for nesting and roosting; open country for hunting. Inhabits a wide variety of such settings; including forest with extensive meadows; groves of conifers or deciduous trees in prairie country; streamside groves in desert. Generally avoids unbroken forest.,Hunts mostly at night; sometimes before dusk; especially when feeding young. Forages over fields or in open woods; flying back and forth a few feet above the ground. Locates prey by sound or by sight; then swoops down to capture it with talons.,2-10; usually 4-6. White. Incubation is by female only; usually 26-28 days. Male brings food for female during incubation period. Young: Female remains with young almost continuously for first 2 weeks; while male brings food for female and young. In latter part of nestling period; female also hunts. Young climb out of nest onto nearby branches after about 3 weeks; can make short flights at about 5 weeks. Adult male feeds young until they are 10-11 weeks old; when they disperse from area.,Mostly small mammals. Usually feeds heavily on common local rodents. Depending on region; may be mostly voles; deer mice; kangaroo rats; pocket gophers; etc.  Also known to eat small birds; shrews; bats; lizards; snakes; other small creatures. ,Early in breeding season; male performs aerial display; flying in zigzags around nesting area with deep wingbeats and glides; occasionally clapping wings together loudly below body. Nest site is usually in tree; 4-30' above ground; usually at about mid-level in tree; sometimes in giant cactus or on cliff ledge. No nest built; uses abandoned nest built by other birds; such as crows; ravens; magpies; various hawks. 
Long-tailed-Duck,Clangula hyemalis,Ducks and Geese,Ocean; large lakes; in summer; tundra pools and lakes. For breeding season favors both low-lying tundra and hilly areas; barren ground and edges of northern forest; as long as open water is nearby. At other seasons mostly on ocean; including far from shore among pack ice; also on Great Lakes and sometimes elsewhere on fresh water.,forages by diving and swimming underwater; with wings partly opened but propelled mainly by feet. Most feeding is within 30' of surface; supposedly able to dive more than 200'; deeper than any other duck.,6-8; sometimes 5-11. Olive-buff to olive-gray. Incubation is by female; 24-29 days. Female covers eggs with down when leaving nest. Young: leave nest shortly after hatching; can swim and dive well when quite small. Young are tended by female; but feed themselves; may feed on items dislodged to surface by diving of female. Age at first flight about 35-40 days.,mollusks; crustaceans; insects. Diet at sea mainly mollusks (including mussels; clams; periwinkles) and crustaceans (including amphipods and isopods); also a few small fish. In summer on breeding territory eats mostly aquatic insects; also crustaceans; mollusks; fish eggs; and some plant material including grasses and pondweeds. ,First breeds at age of 2 years. Courtship display begins by early winter; but most pair formation occurs in early spring. Displays of male include shaking head back and forth; raising long tail high in air; tossing head back with bill pointed up while calling. Nest site is on dry ground close to water; often partly hidden under low growth or among rocks. Nest is a depression lined with available plant material and with large amount of down; the down being added after some eggs are laid. 
Long-tailed-Jaeger,Stercorarius longicaudus,Skuas and Jaegers,Open sea; tundra (summer). Spends much of year far out at sea; generally out of sight of land. In breeding season on tundra; both near coast and well inland; but tends to prefer higher and drier areas rather than marshy coastal tundra. Young birds and non-breeders may remain at sea all year.,In summer on tundra; hunts by hovering and then swooping down on prey; sometimes picks up items while swimming; or catches insects in flight. May steal food from other birds.,2; sometimes one; rarely 3. Brown to olive; blotched darker brown and gray. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-25 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Parents defend nest by diving at predators or humans; even landing on intruder's head and pecking. Young can fly at 22-27 days; remain with parents another 1-3 weeks.,Includes fish; rodents; birds; berries. Summer diet is mostly small rodents; especially lemmings and voles when they are in high population cycle; also insects; small birds; fish; squid; carrion; and berries (especially crowberries). Diet during rest of year poorly known; includes fish; carrion; refuse. ,Probably does not breed until at least 3-4 years old. More likely to nest successfully in years when lemmings are abundant. Has spectacular courtship flight; with rapid swoops and zigzags; often three birds together; or one male chasing one female. In courtship on ground; male feeds female. Nest site is on ground on open tundra; often on slightly raised spot. Nest (built mostly by female?) is simple depression; usually with sparse lining of plant material. 
Louisiana-Waterthrush,Parkesia motacilla,Wood Warblers,Brooks; ravines; wooded swamps. In southern areas; nests in bottomlands; borders of lagoons and swamps; or near sluggish or fast-moving streams. In northern part of range (where it overlaps the range of Northern Waterthrush); favors rapid-flowing; gravel-bottomed streams flowing through hilly; deciduous forest. In winter in the tropics; near streams in lowland woods; occasionally in coastal mangroves.,Walks on ground while foraging; usually along edge or in water; over stones and moss. Turns over dead or wet leaves to find prey. Also flies out over streams to catch flying insects. Defends winter feeding territories against other waterthrushes.,3-6; normally 5. Creamy white; with brown and purple-gray spots. Incubation by female only; 12-14 days. Frequently parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10 days after hatching. 1 brood per year.,Aquatic and terrestrial insects; crustaceans. Eats many insects including beetles; bugs; adult and larval mayflies; dragonflies; crane-fly larvae; ants; caterpillars; scale insects; also small crustaceans; snails; a few small fish and seeds. Tends to take larger items than Northern Waterthrush. ,Males defend long narrow territories along streams. Each male defends by chasing intruding males; and by singing; sometimes sings in flight; as well as from perches and the ground. Male sings persistently only up until eggs are laid; then sings infrequently. Nest site is concealed in roots of upturned tree; near water; under overhanging banks of streams; or in hollow of rocky ravine. Nest is an open cup; probably built by female; made of leaves; moss; twigs; bark; and lined with fine rootlets; ferns; grass stems; and hair. 
Lucifer-Hummingbird,Calothorax lucifer,Hummingbirds,Arid slopes; desert canyons. In southwestern U.S.; mostly on very dry hillsides with scattered ocotillos; agaves; cacti; and thorny shrubs. Also moves into some less arid areas; including grassland with scattered oaks.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and take them in midair; sometimes takes insects from spider webs.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; about 15 days. Young: Female feeds the young. Age at first flight about 19-24 days. May raise two broods per year.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Often visits tubular flowers such as agave; penstemon; and paintbrush. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Male has unique habit of performing courtship display to female while she is at her nest; during the nest-building or egg-laying stage. In display; male shuttles back and forth several times in short flight; with loud rustling noise of wings; then flies high and dives steeply past the nest. Nest site is in open cholla cactus; on stem of ocotillo; or on agave stalk; 2-10 feet above the ground. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of plant fibers; spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged with bits of leaves or lichens. 
Lucys-Warbler,Leiothlypis luciae,Wood Warblers,Mesquite along desert streams and washes; willows; cottonwoods. Breeds mostly in cottonwood-mesquite woods near desert streams or in open groves of mesquite along dry washes in the Sonoran desert. Also found in sycamore and live oak groves near streams in the lower parts of canyons close to arid lowlands.,Most common method of foraging is to hop rapidly about in mesquites and other desert trees and bushes; taking insects from the foliage and twigs. Typically; warblers in this genus do much probing of buds and flowers. Sometimes observed flying out to catch insects in mid-air.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. White or creamy; with red-brown spots near large end. Incubation is by female; possibly also by male. Incubation period unknown. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known. Probably 2 broods per year.,Mostly or entirely insects. Diet is not known in detail; undoubtedly feeds mostly on insects. ,Male displays to the female during courtship by fluffing plumage; raising crown feathers and spreading wings and tail. Nest: Placed in natural hollows in mesquites; old woodpecker holes; under loose bark (especially bark peeled from trunk by fire); sometimes in deserted Verdin nest or hole in eroded stream bank. Typically nests 5-40' above ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is loosely and raggedly made of coarse grass and weeds; bark strips; mesquite leaf stems; surrounding a compact cup of fine grasses. Lined with animal hair or feathers. 
MacGillivrays-Warbler,Geothlypis tolmiei,Wood Warblers,Low dense undergrowth; shady thickets. Breeds in thickets of willow and alder; near stream bottoms or at edge of coniferous or mixed forest. Favors new growth in logged or burned areas (especially with dead and fallen trees); brushy thickets near low moist ground; and thicketed mountain canyons. In winter in the tropics; occurs in forest undergrowth in foothills and mountains.,Forages mostly close to ground in dense thickets; seeking insects on branches and among foliage. Hops when searching for insects on the ground. On the wintering grounds; individuals defend feeding territories and usually forage alone.,Usually 4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 6. Creamy white with brown spots; speckles or blotches. Incubation is by female alone; about 11-13 days. Apparently cowbirds do not commonly parasitize this warbler's nests. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 8-9 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Details of diet are not well known; undoubtedly feeds mostly on insects. Known to eat click beetles; dung beetles; alfalfa weevils; flea beetles; caterpillars; and other insects. Young birds in Colorado will take sap from borings in willows drilled by sapsuckers. ,Male sings frequently through breeding season to defend nesting territory. Nest site is well hidden in dense shrubs; often placed in upright fork of fir saplings; scrub oaks; alders; salal; chokecherry or Spiraea. Usually 2-3' above the ground; sometimes lower or as high as 5' up. Frequently in shady damp places or amid tall weeds and ferns. Nest is loosely constructed open cup made of weed stems; bark shreds; and dry grass; lined with fine grasses; rootlets; and hair. Both sexes probably help build nest. 
Magnificent-Frigatebird,Fregata magnificens,Frigatebirds,Oceanic coasts; islands. Occurs over warm waters; usually along coast but also far offshore at times. Also soars inland in coastal areas (for example; crosses isthmus of Panama from one ocean to the other). Strays are rarely seen far inland around fresh water. Nests on islands; usually small islands with dense growth of mangroves or other trees or shrubs.,Forages in the air; swooping close to water to take items from on or near surface; making very little contact with water. Never swims. Forages in the same way over land; taking prey from beaches without landing. Also feeds by piracy; chasing other birds; forcing them to drop or disgorge their food.,One. White. Incubation is by both sexes; probably 40-50 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. Nest is never left unguarded until young are half-grown; as other members of colony will eat eggs or young at unattended nest. Male departs after about 12 weeks; female continues to feed young. Age at first flight 20-24 weeks; female will feed young for additional 16 weeks or more. Total breeding cycle for female thus lasts about a year; most females probably do not breed every year.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on small fish; also squid; jellyfish; crustaceans. Takes hatchling turtles; young terns and other birds; sometimes eggs. Also scavenges for scraps around fishing boats; docks. ,Breeds in colonies; with nests often very close together. Perched males display (often in groups) by inflating throat pouch to huge red balloon; raising bill high; vibrating partially spread wings; swiveling back and forth; and calling. Females flying overhead are attracted to group; choose one male as mate. Nest:  Site usually in mangroves; trees; or bushes 2-20' above ground or water; sometimes on ground. Nest (built mostly by female; with materials brought by male) a flimsy platform of sticks. 
Magnolia-Warbler,Setophaga magnolia,Wood Warblers,Low conifers; in migration; other trees. Breeds most commonly in areas of short young spruce; also in young hemlocks and pines; and in dense understory of taller coniferous forest. During migration may be in any kind of deciduous shrubs or low trees. In winter in tropics; often in second-growth and scrub as well as edges of taller forest.,forages by hopping along branches; gleaning insects from conifer needles; leaves; and twigs. Takes most insects from underside of vegetation. Sometimes hovers or makes short flights after insects. In summer; males may tend to feed higher than females.,Usually 4; sometimes 3 or 5. White; variably marked with brown; lavender; olive; and gray. Incubation is by female only; 11-13 days. Young: Fed by both parents. May leave nest at age of 8 days; usually 9-10 days. Young can fly at this stage; but may be fed by parents for up to 25 more days. 1 brood per year; perhaps rarely 2.,mostly insects. In breeding season; eats a variety of insects; including beetles; moth caterpillars; leafhoppers; and aphids; also spiders. May eat many spruce budworms when that insect is at epidemic numbers. Occasionally eats berries during inclement weather when insects may be scarce. Diet in migration and winter poorly known. ,Male arrives on breeding grounds before female and establishes territory. Has two song types: one to defend territory against intruding males; other apparently to attract and communicate with mate. Nest site is well hidden in dense low conifer (especially spruce or hemlock); often near trunk on horizontal branch. Usually less than 10' above ground; sometimes up to 30'. Nest is flimsy cup of grasses; weeds; twigs; with lining of fine black rootlets. Both sexes help build nest; but female does most of work. 
Mallard,Anas platyrhynchos,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; wooded swamps; grain fields; ponds; rivers; lakes; bays; city parks. May occur in any kind of aquatic habitat; but favors fresh water at all seasons; only sparingly on coastal waters; mainly in winter on sheltered bays and estuaries. Most abundant in summer on prairie potholes and in semi-open country north of the prairies. Most abundant in winter on swamps and lakes in lower Mississippi Valley.,forages in water by dabbling; submerging head and neck; up-ending; rarely by diving; forages on land by grazing; plucking seeds; grubbing for roots.,7-10; sometimes 5-15. Whitish to olive buff. Incubation is by female; 26-30 days. Young: Leave nest within a day after hatching; are led to water by female. Young are tended by female but feed themselves. Age at first flight 52-60 days. 1 brood per year; perhaps rarely 2.,omnivorous. Majority of diet is plant material; including seeds; stems; and roots of a vast variety of different plants; especially sedges; grasses; pondweeds; smartweeds; many others; also acorns and other tree seeds; various kinds of waste grain. Also eat insects; crustaceans; mollusks; tadpoles; frogs; earthworms; small fish. Young ducklings may eat mostly aquatic insects. ,Pairs form in fall and winter. Displays of male include dipping bill in water and then rearing up; giving whistle and grunt calls as he settles back on water; raising head and tail while giving sharp call; plunging forepart of body deep in water and then flinging up water with bill. Nest: Female; accompanied by male; seeks and chooses site for nest. Site may be more than 1 mile from water; usually on ground among concealing vegetation; but may be on stump; in tree hollow; in basket above water; various other possibilities. Nest is shallow bowl of plant material gathered at the site; lined with down. 
Mangrove-Cuckoo,Coccyzus minor,Cuckoos; Roadrunners; Anis,In our area; mostly in mangroves. In Florida; lives in mangrove swamps and in groves of tropical hardwoods on the Keys and the southern mainland. Elsewhere in range; found in mangroves and in various kinds of scrubby woods; including dry forest far from water.,Forages rather slowly and deliberately among mangroves or other dense growth; peering about; sometimes making short leaps or flutters to take insects from the foliage.,2; sometimes 3. Pale blue-green; fading to greenish yellow. Incubation is probably by both parents; incubation period not well known. Young: Development of young and age at first flight not well known. Probably fed by both parents; as in other cuckoos.,Mostly insects. Diet not known in detail. As with other cuckoos; seems to eat many caterpillars. Also feeds on grasshoppers; praying mantises; moths; flies; and other insects; also some spiders and small frogs; and probably some berries and small fruits. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Male gives low; throaty song in spring; presumably to defend territory and attract a mate. Nest: So far as known; site is in mangrove or other low tree; usually fairly low over the water or ground (probably lower than 10' in most cases); among dense foliage. Nest is a flimsy platform of sticks. 
Manx-Shearwater,Puffinus puffinus,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Off North America; generally occurs over cooler waters (but it inhabits warm waters elsewhere; including waters off eastern South America). Often feeds closer to shore than other shearwaters. Nests on islands; mostly small islands near mainland.,Forages by plunging into water from low flight; by making shallow dives from surface; or by seizing items at or just below surface while swimming. Swims underwater better than some other shearwaters.,One per season. White. Incubation is by both sexes; 47-55 days; rarely up to 63 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. Parents abandon young after about 60 days; and it leaves nest 8-9 days later; going to sea alone.,Mostly small fish. Feeds on a variety of common small fish; especially herrings; sprats; sardines; sand lance; also squid; crustaceans. ,Breeding behavior known mostly from studies around Great Britain. Usually first breeds at age 5-6 years; and may mate for life. Nests in dense colonies on islands. Activity at colony entirely at night. Courtship not well known; but members of pair spend much time in nest several weeks before egg is laid. Nest:  Site is in burrow; usually 3-6 feet long; excavated by both sexes; same burrow may be re-used for several years. Nest chamber is usually lined with small amount of grass; leaves. 
Marbled-Godwit,Limosa fedoa,Sandpipers,Prairies; pools; shores; tideflats. Breeds mostly on northern Great Plains; in areas of native prairie with marshes or ponds nearby. Localized populations also nest on tundra at James Bay; Ontario; and on Alaska Peninsula. In migration and winter around tidal mudflats; marshes; ponds; mainly in coastal regions.,On mudflats and in marshes; forages mostly by probing in water or mud with long bill. Often wades and probes so deeply that head is underwater. Finds most food by touch; may feed by day or night. On prairies; also picks up insects from surface of ground or plants.,4; rarely 3-5. Greenish to olive-buff; lightly spotted with brown. Incubation is probably by both parents; 21-23 days. Incubating bird may sit motionless even when approached closely. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young; but young find all their own food. Age of young at first flight roughly 3 weeks.,Includes insects; mollusks; crustaceans. In summer on prairies; feeds mostly on insects; including many grasshoppers; also roots and seeds of various aquatic plants; such as sedges and pondweeds. On coast; feeds on mollusks; marine worms; crustaceans; other invertebrates. ,May nest in loose colonies. Male displays over breeding territory by flying over area; calling loudly. On ground; members of pair may go through ritualized nest-scrape making display. Nest site is on ground; usually in short grass on dry spot fairly close to water (sometimes far from water). Nest is slight depression; lined with dry grass. Occasionally has slight canopy of grass arranged above nest. 
Marbled-Murrelet,Brachyramphus marmoratus,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Coastal waters; bays. Breeds inland on mountains near coast. Generally on ocean on calm protected waters near coast; as in bays; inlets; among islands; does most foraging in fairly shallow water. Sometimes found on lakes near coast. Nests on mountainsides on islands or well inland in mature forest.,Forages while swimming underwater. Does most feeding in waters less than 100' deep; fairly close to shore.,One. Variable; yellowish to olive to blue-green; marked with brown; black; lavender. Incubation is by both sexes; probably about 4 weeks. Young: Both parents apparently feed young; making feeding visits at night. Young leaves nest at about 27-28 days; probably flies directly to sea or at least to lake near coast.,Fish; crustaceans. Diet varies with place and season; mostly small fish and crustaceans. Fish in diet include many sand lance; capelin; and herring; mostly small but up to 5" in length. Crustaceans include euphausiid shrimp; mysids; amphipods. ,Very few nests have been found; so breeding behavior poorly known; details given here probably incomplete. Solitary nester; not in colonies. Nest site varies. In north; may be on ground on mountainside among sparse or dense growth. In south; may be on tree branch in dense forest; up to 150' above ground. Site may be close to coast or up to 15 miles inland. Nest is no more than shallow depression in lichens or moss on ground or tree branch; droppings of young bird build up into low rim. 
Marsh-Wren,Cistothorus palustris,Wrens,Marshes (cattail; bulrush; or brackish). Breeds in many fresh and brackish marsh situations; usually with a large area of cattails; bulrushes; or cordgrass; also in other kinds of low rank growth along shallow water. Winters in a wider variety of large and small marshes; including salt marshes and brushy edges of ponds or irrigation ditches.,Forages very actively in dense low growth; taking insects from the stems of marsh plants or from the ground. Often picks items from surface of water. Sometimes makes short flights to catch flying insects in mid-air.,4-5; sometimes 3-6; rarely more. Pale brown; heavily dotted with dark brown; sometimes may be all white. Incubation is by female only; about 13-16 days. Young: Both parents feed young but female probably does more. Young leave nest about 12-16 days after hatching. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including beetles; flies; moths; caterpillars; ants; grasshoppers; and many others. May include various aquatic insects and their larvae; including those of mosquitoes and damselflies. Also eats spiders and snails. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing; western males have far more song types than those in the east. One male may have two or more mates. Adults often puncture the eggs of other birds nesting in marsh (including those of other Marsh Wrens). Nest: Male builds several incomplete or "dummy" nests in territory; female chooses one and adds lining; or may build a new one. Nest is anchored to standing cattails; bulrushes; or bushes in marsh; usually 1-3' above water; sometimes higher. Nest is oval or football-shaped mass with entrance on side; woven of wet grass; cattails; rushes; lined with fine grass; plant down; feathers. 
Masked-Booby,Sula dactylatra,Boobies and Gannets,Tropical seas. Forages over warm waters; shallow or deep; sometimes hundreds of miles from land. Nests on islands; mainly low flat islands with little or no vegetation. In Florida; has nested on a small sandy island barely above high-water level.,Forages by plunging into water from flight (from as high as 90 feet above the sea); striking water headfirst and catching prey within a few feet of the surface. May rest on water; watching for fish below and watching other seabirds in vicinity; when it spots prey; it takes flight and begins plunge-diving; and other birds hurry to join in feeding.,1-2. Pale blue to chalky white; becoming nest-stained. Both sexes incubate; placing eggs under webs of feet; incubation period 38-49 days. When 2 eggs are laid; 2nd young to hatch is attacked and ejected from nest by its older sibling and does not survive. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Age at first flight 109-151 days. Young return to nest site and continue to be fed by parents for 30-60 days after able to fly.,Mostly fish. Eats a variety of fish; with flying fish often predominating; also some squid. ,Usually first breeds at age of 4 years. Breeds in colonies. Courtship displays of male include stretching neck and pointing bill skyward. Paired birds present each other with pebbles or feathers; parade slowly forward with prominent display of feet. Nest:  Site is on ground; often near edge of slope or cliff for ease of takeoff. Nest is a shallow depression surrounded by slight rim of pebbles; debris. 
Masked-Duck,Nomonyx dominicus,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; ponds. In United States mainly found on ponds and impoundments with extensive marsh growth and some open water. In tropics also found on mangrove lagoons; swamps; rice plantations.,Forages mostly by diving and swimming underwater; propelled by feet.,4-10. Smaller and smoother than those of Ruddy Duck; whitish to pale buff. Females sometimes lay eggs in each others' nests. Incubation is by female; about 4 weeks. Young: Not well known. Probably leave nest shortly after hatching; are tended by female but feed themselves; as in other stifftails. Age at first flight not known.,Probably mostly plant material. Diet not well known. Apparently eats mostly plant material; including seeds and roots of smartweeds; sedges; grasses; and various other aquatic and waterside plants. Also eats some aquatic insects and crustaceans. ,Breeding behavior not well known. The few known Texas nestings have been in fall. Displays of male apparently include raising tail and lowering bill onto chest while making soft calls; also making short rushes across surface of water. Nest site is among marsh vegetation in shallow water. Nest (built by female) is a woven bowl of reeds and grasses; perhaps with sparse lining of down. 
McCowns-Longspur,Rhynchophanes mccownii,Longspurs and Snow Buntings,Plains; prairies. Breeds in rather dry open prairie with short grass; sometimes with patches of open ground or low cactus. Winters on similar shortgrass plains; also on bare soil such as dry lake beds; plowed fields. At all seasons; favors shorter grass and more open ground than that chosen by Chestnut-collared Longspurs occurring in same region.,Forages while running and walking on ground; picking up items from soil or from plant stems. After flushing insects (such as grasshoppers) from ground; will chase actively; sometimes pursuing them in short flights. Except during nesting season; usually forages in flocks.,2-4; sometimes 5; perhaps rarely 6. White to pale olive; marked with brown and lavender. Incubation is by female only; about 12 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10 days after hatching; can run well at this stage but fly only poorly until a few days later. May remain with parents for at least another 3 weeks.,Mostly seeds and insects. Seeds make up more than half of summer diet of adults; and most of winter diet; included are seeds of grasses; weeds; sedges; shrubs. Also eats many insects; especially in summer; including grasshoppers; caterpillars; ants; moths; and others. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male defends nesting territory by performing flight song display; flying up to about 30' and then sailing or gliding down; with wings outstretched and tail fanned; while singing. Will also fight aggressively with intruding males. In courtship; male may circle female on ground; raising one wing high to show off white wing-lining; while singing. Nest site is on open ground; usually placed very close to a large grass clump or weed; small shrub; dried cow manure; or other object. Nest is built by female in slight depression in ground; an open cup made mostly of grass; sometimes with weeds; rootlets; and lichens added; lined with fine grass; plant fibers; animal hair. 
McKays-Bunting,Plectrophenax hyperboreus,Longspurs and Snow Buntings,Tundra; barrens; shores. Probably breeds in most available habitats in its very limited range; including open tundra with numerous rocky outcrops; stony beaches; and rocky scree slopes with little vegetation. Winters mostly on coastal beaches and low tundra near the shore.,Forages while walking and running on the ground; picking up items from the ground or from plants. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,Probably about 5. Pale green; dotted with pale brown. Incubation poorly known; probably similar to Snow Bunting; but it is possible that male may help incubate. Young: Probably fed by both parents; and probably leave nest about 10-17 days after hatching; as in the Snow Bunting.,Probably mostly insects and seeds. Diet is not known in detail; but undoubtedly feeds on many insects (and some spiders) in summer; mainly or entirely on seeds in winter. Along shorelines; may also eat tiny crustaceans or other marine life. ,Nesting behavior is not well known; but probably similar to that of Snow Bunting. In display on breeding grounds; may sing while flying in a wide circle. Nest site is usually in some protected cavity; such as a deep crevice in cliff; among or underneath rocks; or inside hollowed-out pieces of driftwood; these secure sites may be chosen for protection from Arctic foxes. Nest is a shallow cup of grass; lined with finer grasses. 
Mealy-Parrot,Amazona farinosa,African and New World Parrots,Humid to semi-humid forest and plantations. Absent in open or dry habitat.,NA,NA,NA,Breeding occurs from November to March and the female lays three eggs on average; incubating them for about 4 weeks. Like many young parrots they stay with their parents for a considerable time; about 2 months; before establishing their independence.
Merlin,Falco columbarius,Falcons,Open conifer woodland; prairie groves; in migration; also foothills; marshes; open country. Generally breeds in semi-open terrain having trees for nest sites and open areas for hunting. Habitat varies from coniferous forest in north and on northwest coast to isolated deciduous groves and suburban yards on prairies. May winter in more open areas; such as grasslands; coastal marshes.,Does most hunting by watching from a perch; then flying out to capture prey in the air. Also hunts by flying low among trees or over ground; taking prey by surprise; seldom dives steeply from above to capture prey. Birds; insects; and bats are usually caught in mid-air.,4-5; sometimes 2-6. Whitish; lightly or heavily marked with reddish-brown. Incubation is mostly by female; 28-32 days; male brings food to female; then he incubates while she eats. Young: Female remains with young most of time; brooding them when they are small. Male brings food; female takes it from him near nest and then feeds it to young. Age of young at first flight about 29 days.,Mostly small birds. Often specializes on locally abundant species of birds (such as Horned Larks on the plains; House Sparrows in urban settings; small sandpipers on coast). Also feeds on large insects (especially dragonflies); rodents; bats; reptiles. ,In courtship; male performs spectacular flight displays; with steep dives; strong twisting flight; glides; rolling from side to side; fluttering with shallow wingbeats. Male brings food and presents it to female. Nest site is usually in tree in old nest of hawk; crow; or magpie; 10-60' above ground. Sometimes in large tree cavity; on cliff ledge; or on ground. Usually little or no material added to existing nest. 
Mew-Gull,Larus canus,Gulls and Terns,Coastal waters in winter; lakes in summer. Along Pacific Coast; concentrates in winter around river mouths and lagoons; and freshwater ponds near the shore. Not as common at garbage dumps as many larger gulls; and seldom occurs any distance offshore. In summer; mostly around lakes in northern forest.,Forages while walking; wading; or swimming; or dips down to surface of water in flight. May catch flying insects in the air. Sometimes carries hard-shelled mollusks into the air and drops them on rocks to break them open.,3; sometimes 2. Olive to buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-28 days. Young: May leave ground nests when a few days old but remain nearby. Both parents feed young. Age at first flight about 5 weeks.,Omnivorous. Diet may be mostly small fish along coast; mostly insects around inland lakes; but also eats crustaceans; mollusks; sea urchins; earthworms; small rodents; young birds of other species; carrion; refuse. May eat many berries in late summer; and eats grain at times. ,Breeds in small colonies or in isolated pairs. In courtship; female approaches male who holds territory; in hunched posture; wagging head from side to side. Nest site is on high ground near water; or on top of stump or dense low spruce up to 20' above ground. May build floating nest in marsh; in Europe; may nest on gravel roofs. Ground nest is shallow scrape lined with grass; tree nest is platform or shallow cup of twigs; grasses. Both sexes help build nest. 
Mexican-Chickadee,Poecile sclateri,Chickadees and Titmice,Conifers in mountains. In limited range in United States; breeds in mountains in open ponderosa pine forest and in higher; denser forests of spruce and Douglas-fir. May range down into pine-oak forest and sycamore groves in winter. Farther south; in Mexico; lives in various habitats from high mountain fir forest down into oak woodlands.,Forages mostly by hopping among twigs and branches and gleaning food from surface; often hanging upside down to reach underside of branches. Sometimes takes food while hovering; and occasionally catches flying insects in mid-air. May hammer on galls with bill to break them open and pull out insect larvae. Unlike many chickadees; not known to store food.,5-9. White; with reddish brown dots concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; incubation period not well known. Female may cover eggs with nest material when leaving nest. Male feeds female during incubation period. Young: Female broods young at first; while male brings most food; later; both parents feed young. Adult may sweep outside of nest entrance with crushed beetles; chemicals from these insects may help repel predators. Age of young when leaving nest not well known.,Mostly insects; probably some seeds. Diet is not well known; but probably consists mostly of insects; including caterpillars; beetles; and others. Probably also eats seeds. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Nest site is in hole in tree; usually 10-40' above ground; sometimes higher; can be just a few inches up in stumps. Adults may enlarge natural cavity; but details poorly known. Also will use nest boxes. Nest (apparently built by female) has foundation of bark fibers and moss; lining of soft moss; animal hair. 
Mexican-Jay,Aphelocoma wollweberi,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Open oak forests (Arizona); oak-pine woods (Texas). In Arizona; found in various oak woodlands; including those mixed with pines; in canyons and lower slopes of mountains (up to about 7;000'). Elsewhere in range; in Texas and Mexico; found in a variety of forests dominated by pines and oaks.,Forages on the ground or in trees; usually in flocks. May visit large flowers in summer for nectar and insects. Rarely catches insects in flight. Breaks open acorns by holding them against branch with feet and pounding with bill. Harvests acorns in fall and buries them in ground; often remembering location and retrieving them later.,4-5; sometimes 1-6. Eggs pale unmarked green in Arizona; in Texas; pale blue-green; usually with pale brownish spots. Incubation is by female only; about 18 days. Other adults in flock feed incubating female on nest. Young: Fed by both parents and by other members of flock. Young leave nest at about 25-28 days; may be fed for several weeks thereafter.,Omnivorous; mostly acorns; seeds; insects. Diet is largely acorns and seeds of pinyon pine from fall through winter; mostly insects in summer. Eats grasshoppers; beetles; caterpillars; and many other insects; also lizards; small snakes; birds' eggs; rarely mice or birds. ,Flocks defend permanent territories that may remain the same for generations. Within each flock; 2-4 females may nest at one time; each is attended by one male; but may mate with other males in flock as well. In Texas; where flocks are smaller; may nest as isolated pairs. Nest site is in tree; often oak; juniper; or pine; usually well hidden among foliage. Height averages about 20' up; can be 6-60' above the ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is bulky cup of sticks and twigs; lined with fine rootlets and plant fibers. 
Mexican-Violetear,Colibri thalassinus,Hummingbirds,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Mexican-Whip-poor-will,Antrostomus arizonae,Nightjars,Pine-oak woods in mountains. Breeds in woodland in mountains and canyons; mostly in the pine-oak zone at middle elevations; sometimes higher.,Forages at night; especially at dusk and dawn and on moonlit nights. Forages by flying out from a perch in a tree; or in low; continuous flight along the edges of woods and clearings; sometimes by fluttering up from the ground. Captures insects in its wide; gaping mouth and swallows them whole.,2. Whitish; either unmarked or very lightly marked with brown. Incubation is by both parents (usually more by female); 19-21 days. Young: Cared for by both parents. Adults feed young by regurgitating insects. Age of young at first flight about 20 days.,Insects. Feeds on night-flying insects; especially moths; also beetles; mosquitoes; and many others. ,Male sings at night to defend territory and to attract a mate. Courtship behavior not well known; male approaches female on ground with much head-bobbing; bowing; and sidling about. Nest site is on ground; in woods but often near the edge of a clearing; on open soil covered with dead leaves or pine needles. No nest built; eggs laid on flat ground. 
Mississippi-Kite,Ictinia mississippiensis,Hawks and Eagles,Wooded streams; groves; shelterbelts. For nesting; requires trees (preferably tall) next to open country. In southeast; found mostly in groves of trees along rivers or swamps where surrounding country is more open. On plains and in southwest; nests in tall trees along rivers; in towns; or in groves or shelterbelts on prairie.,Catches many large flying insects high in the air in graceful maneuvers; often then holding these in one foot and eating them while soaring. Also skims low to catch prey on or near the ground. Sometimes flies out from a perch to catch passing insects. Pursues bats and flying birds (such as swallows and swifts) in the air. Sometimes catches insects that have been flushed from the grass by herds of grazing animals or by fire. Also scavenges road-killed animals at times (this may account for occasional large rodents or turtles in diet).,1-2. White. Incubation is by both parents; 29-31 days. Young: Both parents care for the young; brooding them in cool weather and shading them at mid-day. Both parents bring food for young. At first; may feed young mostly insects; regurgitated into nest; may bring larger prey later. Young may climb out of nest onto nearby branches at age about 4 weeks; may make first flights at about 5 weeks. Adults continue to feed them for at least 8 weeks after hatching.,Mostly large insects. Major items in diet include cicadas; grasshoppers; katydids; beetles; and dragonflies; also eats moths; bees; and other insects; mainly large ones. In addition; eats lesser numbers of frogs; toads; snakes; bats; rodents; small birds; turtles. ,Usually nests in loose colonies. Courtship behavior not well known; may involve aerial acrobatics; and posturing while perched. Nest site is in tree; usually near edge of woodlot; usually 20-35' above ground; can be up to 140' high. In oaks or mesquites on plains; may be as low as 6'. Nest (built by both sexes) is rather flimsy platform of dead twigs; lined with green leaves. Adults continue to add greenery to nest during season. 
Mitred-Parakeet,Psittacara mitratus,African and New World Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Monk-Parakeet,Myiopsitta monachus,African and New World Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Montezuma-Quail,Cyrtonyx montezumae,New World Quail,Grassy oak canyons; wooded mountain slopes with bunchgrass. Presence tall grass and usually oaks seem to be main requirements. Found in open oak or pine-oak woodland; open grassy hills with scattered trees; sometimes in openings in coniferous forest higher in mountains. Avoids low deserts.,Does much of its foraging by digging in soil with its feet to dig up bulbs; or scratching with its feet in leaf litter under the oaks to uncover insects or seeds. Forages in pairs or in family groups.,10-12; sometimes 8-14. White; often becoming stained in nest. Has a longer incubation than most quail; 25-26 days. Incubation is probably by female only. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching; are accompanied by both parents. Adults may lead young to food; but young feed themselves. Young are capable of making short flights at about 10 days; reach adult size in about 10-11 weeks.,Bulbs; insects; seeds. The bulbs of various plants (including wood sorrel and nut-grasses) may be a major part of the diet. Also eats many insect larvae and pupae; acorns and other nuts; various seeds; and berries and small fruits. ,In Arizona; nesting is mostly in mid to late summer; timed to the summer rains. May nest earlier in spring farther east. Male defends nesting territory with a purring trill -- soft; but audible for some distance. Nest site is on ground in tall grass. Nest (built by female; possibly with help from male) is well constructed; shallow depression lined with grass; with more grass domed over top and often hanging down over small entrance on side. 
Morelets-Seedeater,Sporophila morelleti,Tanagers,Weedy places; tall grass; brush. In Texas; found mainly in weedy overgrown fields or brushy open woods; typically close to water; may roost in tall marsh growth. Farther south in tropics; found in a wide variety of open habitats; from marshes and open grassy fields to brushy edges of woods.,Forages in low growth or sometimes on the ground; clambering about among grasses and weeds; and plucking seeds from grass stalks. Occasionally will feed higher in dense bushes or low trees. Except in nesting season; almost always forages in flocks.,Probably 2-4. Pale blue to pale gray; with spots of brown often concentrated at the larger end. Incubation is probably by female only; about 13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-11 days after hatching.,Seeds and insects. Diet probably includes many small seeds; especially those of grasses. Also probably feeds on a variety of small insects. ,Often nests in small colonies; with several pairs fairly close together. Male sings to defend nesting territory. Nest: In Texas; nests have been found in shrubs or in large weeds such as giant ragweed; usually 3-5' above the ground. Nest (probably built by female) is a small and compact open cup of grass; small twigs; rootlets; plant fibers; and plant down; sometimes with the addition of spiderwebs or animal hair. 
Mottled-Duck,Anas fulvigula,Ducks and Geese,Marshes. Open marshy country; wet prairies; rice fields. Favors treeless country; wide horizons. In coastal areas; usually found in fresh or brackish ponds adjacent to coast rather than in salt marsh.,forages in shallow water; mostly by dabbling with bill at mud just below water's surface; occasionally by up-ending. Young ducklings frequently dive underwater to feed; adults seldom do.,8-12; sometimes 5-13. Whitish to pale olive. Generally fewer eggs in later clutches. Incubation is by female only; 24-28 days. Young: leave nest shortly after hatching; female leads them to feeding sites; and young feed themselves. Young can make short flights to escape danger at about 50 days; capable of sustained flight at 60-70 days.,omnivorous. Diet includes seeds of aquatic plants and grasses; insects; snails; occasionally small fish. Young ducklings feed almost entirely on insects and other invertebrates. ,Pairs usually formed in fall; with breeding activity beginning in January. Pairs may prospect for nest sites together; flying low over marsh. Nest site is in dense growth in marsh or prairie; sometimes on canal bank or in agricultural field; usually within 600' of water. Where supported in dense clumps of grass; nest may be several inches above ground. Nest is shallow bowl of grasses; reeds; lined with down and breast feathers. 
Mottled-Petrel,Pterodroma inexpectata,Shearwaters and Petrels,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Mountain-Bluebird,Sialia currucoides,Thrushes,Open country with some trees; in winter; also treeless terrain. Often in more open areas than other bluebirds. Breeding habitats not always in mountains; found in lowland prairies and sagebrush flats as well as alpine zones above treeline. In winter; most common in pinyon-juniper woods but also in open grassland; desert; farmland; even barren plowed fields.,Often forages by hovering over open field; then dropping to the ground when prey is spotted. Hovers more than other bluebirds. Also perches on rock or low branch and darts out to catch flying insects.,5-6; sometimes 4-8. Pale blue; unmarked (occasionally white). Incubation is by female; about 13-17 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 17-23 days after hatching; are tended by parents for another 3-4 weeks. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds heavily on insects; including beetles; grasshoppers; caterpillars; crickets; ants; bees; and others. Also eats some berries; including those of mistletoe; juniper; hackberry; and other plants. Berries are particularly important in the diet in winter. ,Sometimes interbreeds with Eastern Bluebird where their ranges overlap. Nest: Apparently the female selects the site for the nest. Site is in a cavity; usually a natural hollow or old woodpecker hole in tree; or in a birdhouse. Sometimes nests in holes in dirt banks; crevices in cliffs or among rocks; holes in sides of buildings; old nests of other birds (such as Cliff Swallow or Dipper). Nest in cavity (probably built by both sexes) is loose cup of weed stems; grass; twigs; rootlets; pine needles; sometimes lined with animal hair or feathers. 
Mountain-Chickadee,Poecile gambeli,Chickadees and Titmice,Mountain forests; conifers; lower levels in winter. Breeds in a variety of coniferous stands; including forests of pine; spruce; fir; or Douglas-fir; also groves of aspen in coniferous zones. Sometimes in lower habitats such as pine-oak or pinyon-juniper; and rarely breeds in cottonwood groves in lowlands. May wander to lowlands in winter; occupying planted conifers if available.,Forages actively in trees; often feeding very high in conifers. Forages by gleaning food from twigs; often hanging upside down. Works along trunk or major branches; probing in bark crevices; has been seen using a wood splinter to probe in deep cracks. Sometimes takes food from while hovering. Will come to bird feeders for seeds or suet.,7-9; sometimes 5-12. White; dotted with reddish brown; sometimes unmarked. Incubation is probably by female only; about 14 days. Adult disturbed on nest will give a loud hiss; sounding like a snake. Young: Female spends much time with young at first; while male brings most food; later; both parents feed young. Age of young at first flight about 3 weeks.,Mostly insects; seeds; and berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including many caterpillars; beetles; and others; often feeds on insect eggs and pupae; as well as spiders and their eggs. Also eats many seeds; some berries and small fruits. ,In some areas; numbers may be limited by a scarcity of good nesting sites. Nest site is usually in hole in tree; either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; or a cavity enlarged or excavated by the chickadees. Usually 5-25' above the ground; sometimes in stumps only a few inches up. Same site may be used more than one year. Sometimes uses nest box; occasionally even nests in holes in ground. In natural site in tree; both sexes help excavate. Nest (built by female; probably with help from male) is soft foundation of bark fibers; moss; hair; feathers. 
Mountain-Plover,Charadrius montanus,Plovers,Semi-arid plains; grasslands; plateaus. Favors areas of very short grass; even bare soil. Typically far from water. Nests mostly in short-grass prairie; including overgrazed pasture and very arid plains. In some areas; nests mainly on the rather barren open ground found in large prairie-dog towns. Winter habitats include desert flats; plowed fields.,Typically they run a few steps and then pause; then run again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible.,3; sometimes 2; rarely 1-4. Olive-buff with many black marks. Incubation is by one or both sexes; 28-31 days. On very hot days; adult will stand over eggs; shading them from intense sun. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching; are tended by one or both parents; but feed themselves. Adults shade young on hot days; and family may seek out any available shade at mid-day. Young can fly well at about 33-34 days.,Mostly insects. Diet is not well known; but in the dry upland habitats where this plover lives; it probably feeds almost entirely on insects; including grasshoppers; beetles; flies; and crickets. ,In breeding season; male may display by flying high over territory with exaggerated slow wingbeats; calling. Female may lay one clutch of eggs and leave male to care for eggs and young; then lay another clutch and incubate it herself. Nest site is on flat open ground (flat sites chosen even in hilly country). On featureless plain; nest is often placed close to some conspicuous object; such as a pile of cow manure. Nest is shallow scrape in soil. Nest lining (including pebbles; grass;  rootlets; chips of cow manure) added mostly during incubation. Several nest scrapes are made; only one is used. 
Mountain-Quail,Oreortyx pictus,New World Quail,Dense brush in wooded foothills and mountains. Most common in pine-oak woodland; coniferous forest; and chaparral; sometimes in pinyon-juniper woods or in scrub at lower elevations. May be common in areas of second-growth brush after fires or clearcuts. Requires dense low thickets for cover. During hot weather; rarely found more than a mile from water.,Has a wide variety of foraging techniques. Picks up items from ground; often scratching among leaf litter; uses feet to dig for bulbs; climbs in shrubs and trees to pick berries; leaves; jumps up from ground to reach seeds and berries in low plants.,9-10; sometimes 6-15. Creamy white to pale buff. Incubation is apparently by both sexes (female may do more); about 24 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching; are tended by both parents and led to food; but young feed themselves. Parents are very active in defense of young; putting on distraction displays to lure away predators. Development of young and age at first flight not well known. Usually one brood per year; sometimes two at low elevations or in very good conditions.,Includes seeds; bulbs; leaves; berries; insects. Diet varies with season. Eats large amounts of seeds; bulbs; acorns; fair amounts of green leaves; flowers; berries; also some insects; fungi. ,Males call in breeding season to defend territory. In courtship; male faces female; fluffs feathers; droops wings. Nest site is on ground in dense cover; usually sheltered by a shrub; log; or grass clump. Nest is a shallow depression; lined with grass; pine needles; leaves; feathers. 
Mourning-Dove,Zenaida macroura,Pigeons and Doves,Farms; towns; open woods; roadsides; grasslands. Found in almost any kind of open or semi-open habitat in temperate parts of North America; including forest clearings; farmland; suburbs; prairies; deserts. May be most common in edge habitats having both trees and open ground; but also found in some treeless areas. Avoids unbroken forest.,Forages mostly on ground; sometimes will perch on plants to take seeds. Will come to bird feeders; often eating on the ground under elevated feeders. Eats quickly to fill crop with seeds; then digests them while resting. Regularly swallows grit (small gravel) to aid in digestion of hard seeds.,2. White. Incubation is by both parents; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest at about 15 days; usually wait nearby to be fed for next 1-2 weeks. One pair may raise as many as 5-6 broods per year in southern areas.,Seeds. Feeds almost entirely on seeds (99% of diet). Favors seeds of cultivated grains; also those of grasses; ragweeds; many other plants. Occasionally eats snails; very rarely any insects. ,In courtship; male flies up with noisy wingbeats and then goes into long circular glide; wings fully spread and slightly bowed down. On ground; male approaches female stiffly; his chest puffed out; bowing and giving emphatic cooing song. Members of mated pairs may preen each other's feathers. Nest: Male leads female to potential nest sites; female chooses one. Site is usually in tree or shrub; sometimes on ground; sometimes on building ledge or other structure; usually lower than 40'; rarely up to 100' or more above ground. Nest is very flimsy platform of twigs; male brings material; female builds. 
Mourning-Warbler,Geothlypis philadelphia,Wood Warblers,Clearings; thickets; slashings; undergrowth. Breeds in brushy northern habitats; including dense shrubbery in old deciduous woods clearings; brushy cut-over lands; lowland thickets of raspberry and blackberry tangles; or bog and marsh edges; often in temporary habitats; growing up after fires or clearcuts. In winter in the tropics; lives in low; dense thickets and overgrown fields in lowlands and foothills.,During the breeding season; forages primarily in shrubs within a few feet of the ground; hops while feeding on ground. Sometimes makes short flights to catch flying insects. Generally feeds alone rather than joining flocks.,3-4; sometimes 5. Creamy white with brown spots or blotches. Incubated by female only; about 12 days. Male feeds female on nest during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest after 7-9 days. Care of fledglings may continue for another 4 weeks or more.,Probably mostly insects. Details of the diet are poorly known; but has been seen foraging for caterpillars; beetles; and other insects; also eats spiders. In winter in the tropics; sometimes feeds on the protein bodies from the leaf-bases of young cecropia trees. ,Details of the breeding behavior are not well known. Male sings to defend nesting territory; during territorial boundary encounters with rival males; he may bob violently; flip wings outward; and fan his tail. Nest: Usually placed on ground next to shrub at base of weeds in raspberry or blackberry briars; or among fern; goldenrod; or grass tussocks. Also sometimes in bush within a couple of feet of the ground. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is an open; bulky cup made of leaves; with a core of weeds and coarse grasses; lined with fine grass and hair. 
Murphys-Petrel,Pterodroma ultima,Shearwaters and Petrels,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Muscovy-Duck,Cairina moschata,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Mute-Swan,Cygnus olor,Ducks and Geese,Ponds; both fresh and salt; coastal lagoons; salt bays. In North America found in wide variety of wetland areas including all types of marshes; lakes; park ponds; often in close association with humans; but also in some remote wild areas.,Feeds by dabbling at water's surface; dipping head and neck below surface; and upending with tail up and head extending straight down; also grazes on land. Readily adapts to artificial feeding by humans.,5-7; up to 10; rarely 11. Very pale green; becoming nest-stained. Incubation period about 36 days. Female does almost all incubating; male will sit on nest while female is off foraging. Young: both adults tend young; small young often carried on parents' backs. Young fledge in 4-5 months; usually remain with parents through first winter.,Mostly plant material. Feeds on seeds; stems; leaves; and roots of aquatic plants; including pondweeds; eelgrass; algae. Also grazes on grasses; feeds on waste grain. Sometimes eats insects; snails; worms; tadpoles; small fish. ,Pairs usually form at age of 2 years; first nesting usually at 3-4 years. Pairs in courtship face each other and turn heads from side to side in unison. In threat display to protect nesting area; wings arched over back; head laid far back with neck feathers fluffed out; while swan swims forward jerkily. Nest site on shoreline; small island; or mound built up in shallows. Nest (built by female; although male helps gather material) is mound of plant material; usually 5-6' in diameter; with shallow depression on top. 
Nanday-Parakeet,Aratinga nenday,African and New World Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Nashville-Warbler,Leiothlypis ruficapilla,Wood Warblers,Cool; open mixed woods with undergrowth; forest edges; bogs. Breeds in deciduous; coniferous; and streamside woodlands; also bogs and thickets. Favors cedar and spruce bogs in northern part of range; abandoned fields and mountain pastures with saplings and young trees in eastern United States. In the west; breeds in thickets of manzanita and other shrubs near belts of pine and fir.,Forages mainly in the lower parts of trees in open woodlands and in low thickets at forest edges. Takes insects from the ground; and takes them from foliage while perching or hovering.,Usually 4-5. White; with reddish brown spots concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by both parents (but female does more); 11-12 days. Female is fed on nest by male during incubation. Young: Nestlings are fed by both parents; but mostly by the female. Young leave the nest about 11 days after hatching.,Insects. Adults eat beetles; caterpillars; grasshoppers; leafhoppers; aphids; and other insects; including the eggs and larvae of various types. Nestlings are fed caterpillars; small beetles; flies; and other insects. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. On breeding territory; males sing from perches and also sometimes during slow; hovering display flight. Nest: Well-hidden; on the ground in a depression made in club mosses; grass; and ferns; usually under scrubby bushes or saplings. Open cup nest is made of coarse grass; ferns; and strips of bark; rimmed with moss; lined with fine grass; animal hair; or pine needles. Female builds the nest. 
Nelsons-Sparrow,Ammospiza nelsoni,New World Sparrows,Fresh and salt marshes. In the interior; it summers on the northern Great Plains; in freshwater marsh with growth of cordgrass and other grasses. On the coast; it nests in salt marsh. During the winter; it lives mainly in coastal salt marshes.,Forages while walking on the ground or while climbing in marsh plants. Picks items from surface of plants; ground; or water; and sometimes probes in mud.,3-5; sometimes 2-6. Greenish white to pale blue-green; heavily dotted with reddish-brown. Incubation is by female only; 11-12 days. Young: Nestlings are usually fed by female alone. Young leave nest about 8-11 days after hatching; may remain with female for another 2-3 weeks. May raise 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and other invertebrates; some seeds. Animal matter makes up much of winter diet and almost all of summer diet. Feeds on insects; spiders; amphipods; small crabs and snails; marine worms; other invertebrates. Also eats seeds of grasses and other marsh plants; especially in fall and winter. ,Unusual breeding system. Males do not defend territories; but move around large area of marsh; singing to attract females. Both sexes are promiscuous; and no pairs are formed; males take no part in caring for the eggs or young. Nest site is in marsh; usually in raised situation in dense grass clumps. Nests in coastal marshes usually placed just above normal high tide mark. Nest (built by female) is a bulky open cup of grass; sometimes partially domed over; with lining of finer grass. 
Neotropic-Cormorant,Phalacrocorax brasilianus,Cormorants,Tidal waters; lakes. In United States on warm southern waters; mostly fresh or brackish. Even in coastal regions; mainly on protected estuaries; rivers; or ponds; although may nest on coastal islands. May nest far inland in dead trees around reservoirs. In Latin America found in wide variety of inland and coastal areas; on both warm and cold waters.,Forages by diving from surface and swimming underwater; propelled mostly by feet. Rarely plunges into water from air after prey. May forage in groups; birds beating water with wings to drive fish forward into shallows.,3-4; sometimes 1-5. Bluish white; becoming nest-stained. Incubation apparently by both sexes; averages about 25-30 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. Age at first flight not well known; but young raised on islands able to swim and dive at 8 weeks; fed until 11th week; independent at 12 weeks.,Small fish. Feeds mostly on abundant small fish of shallow protected waters; typical prey about 2" long; up to about 5". Also eats tadpoles; frogs; aquatic insects. In wide range of tropical habitats; probably other prey as well. ,Breeds in colonies. Displays of male include sitting with tail raised; bill pointed up; while raising and lowering tips of folded wings. Both sexes display by stretching neck up; bill open; waving head back and forth. Nest:  Site usually in live or dead bushes or trees; 3-25' above water; sometimes on ground on islands. Nest (probably built by both sexes) a solid platform of sticks; with depression at center lined with twigs; grass. 
Northern-Beardless-Tyrannulet,Camptostoma imberbe,Tyrant Flycatchers,Low woods; mesquites; stream thickets; lower canyons. In United States; often in woods near streams through dry country. Favors stands of mesquite or cottonwood-willow groves in Arizona; native woodland of huisache; ebony; hackberry; and mesquite in southern Texas. In tropics found in a variety of semi-open habitats and dry woods.,Especially in summer; often forages in typical flycatcher style; flying out from a perch to catch insects in its bill; taking them either in the air or from foliage. Often; however; forages more like a vireo; moving slowly and taking insects from surface of twigs or leaves.,3; sometimes 1-2. White; finely marked with dots of brown and gray; especially around the larger end. Details of incubation poorly known. Young: Probably fed by both parents. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Mostly insects. Diet not known in detail. Apparently feeds mostly on very small and slow-moving insects; known items include scale insects; treehoppers; beetle larvae; moth caterpillars; fly pupae; and others. Also reported to eat some seeds and berries. ,Nesting behavior is not well known. Male sings whistled song in spring and summer to defend nesting territory. Nest site is in outer branches of tree or large shrub; 4-50' above the ground; usually 10-30' up. Often placed where it will be well camouflaged: inside a clump of mistletoe; or in an old tent caterpillar web; in a tree that has many such clumps. Nest size and shape of a baseball; with an entrance high on one side; made of grasses and weeds; lined with soft plant down and feathers. 
Northern-Bobwhite,Colinus virginianus,New World Quail,Farms; brushy open country; roadsides; wood edges. Found in a wide variety of semi-open habitats; including brushy meadows; overgrown fields; or where pastures or agricultural fields are next to hedgerows or woodlots. "Masked Bobwhite" of southwest inhabits ungrazed native grasslands.,Forages by walking on ground; head down; searching for food by sight; sometimes moves up into vines or shrubs. Feeds in flocks (coveys) at most seasons; alone or in family groups during breeding season.,Usually 12-16. White to pale buff. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-24 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching; are tended by both parents; but feed themselves. If danger threatens young; parents may put on distraction display. Young can make short flights at 1-2 weeks; not full-grown for several more weeks.,Includes seeds; leaves; insects. Diet varies with season and place. Eats many seeds (especially those of legumes); also leaves; buds; berries; acorns; roots; insects; spiders; and snails. May eat mostly seeds in winter; with more insects eaten in summer. Young birds may eat mostly insects at first. ,In courtship; male turns head to side to show off pattern; droops wings; fluffs up feathers; makes short rushes at female; also walks slowly around female with tail fanned; feathers fluffed up. Nest site (apparently chosen by both members of pair) is on ground among dense growth. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow depression lined with grass; leaves. Grass and weeds are often woven into an arch over nest; making it very well hidden; with entrance at one side. 
Northern-Cardinal,Cardinalis cardinalis,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Woodland edges; thickets; suburban gardens; towns; desert washes. Found in a wide variety of brushy or semi-open habitats in the East; from forest clearings and swamps to city parks; almost wherever there are some dense bushes for nesting. In the Southwest; more local; occurs in tall brush; streamside thickets; groves of mesquites in desert.,Forages mostly while hopping on ground or in low bushes; sometimes higher in trees. Readily comes to bird feeders; where it favors sunflower seeds.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Whitish to pale bluish or greenish white; marked with brown; purple; and gray. Incubation is almost always by female alone; 12-13 days. ,Mostly seeds; insects; berries. Diet is quite varied. Feeds on many insects; including beetles; true bugs; grasshoppers; caterpillars; ants; flies; and many others; also spiders; centipedes; and snails. Most of diet is vegetable matter; including seeds of weeds and grasses; waste grain; leaf buds; flowers; and many berries and wild fruits. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory; actively attacking intruding males (and attacking his own reflection in windows and mirrors). In courtship; male and female raise heads high; sway back and forth while singing softly; male often feeds female early in breeding season. Female sings mainly in spring before start of nesting. Nest: Usually well hidden in dense shrubs; vines; or low trees; placed 3-10' above ground; sometimes higher. Nest (built by female) is open cup made of twigs; weeds; grass; bark strips; leaves; rootlets; lined with fine grass or hair. 
Northern-Flicker,Colaptes auratus,Woodpeckers,Open forests; woodlots; groves; towns; semi-open country. With its wide range; from Alaska to Nicaragua; the flicker can be found in almost any habitat with trees. Tends to avoid dense unbroken forest; requiring some open ground for foraging. May be in very open country with few trees.,Forages by hopping on ground; climbing tree trunks and limbs; occasionally flying out to catch insects in the air. Also will perch in outer branches to eat fruits and berries. Has been reported catching young bats leaving their roost in Wyoming.,5-8; sometimes 3-12. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); 11-16 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young leave nest about 4 weeks after hatching; are fed by parents at first; later following them to good foraging sites. 1 brood per year; or 2 in south.,Mostly ants and other insects. Probably eats ants more frequently than any other North American bird. Also feeds on beetles; termites; caterpillars; and other insects. Eats many fruits and berries; especially in fall and winter; and eats seeds and nuts at times. ,Males defend nesting territory with calling; drumming; and many aggressive displays; including swinging head back and forth; flicking wings open and spreading tail to show off bright underside. Courtship displays mostly similar. Nest site is cavity in tree or post; rarely in a burrow in the ground. Tree cavities usually in dead wood; pine; cottonwood; and willow are among favored trees. Cavity excavated by both sexes; typically 6-20' above ground; sometimes much higher (to 100' or more). 
Northern-Fulmar,Fulmarus glacialis,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean; breeds colonially on open sea cliffs. Generally over cold waters; including around edges of pack ice in Arctic Ocean. Also south into temperate waters (especially around European nesting sites; and in winter off North America's west coast). Widespread at sea; often concentrated over outer continental shelf; upwellings.,Forages by seizing items at or just below surface of water while swimming. Also plunges into water and dives (to 12' or more below surface); propelled by feet and half-opened wings. May feed by day or night.,One. White. Incubation is by both sexes; usually 49-53 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. One of the parents is usually present at nest for first 2 weeks after hatching; both adult and young can defend against intruders by spitting foul-smelling oil. Age at first flight 41-57 days; usually 46-51.,Varied; includes crustaceans; fish. Feeds on a wide variety of marine creatures including crustaceans; small squid; marine worms; fish; and carrion. Follows fishing boats and other ships and feeds on offal; scraps; refuse. In North Pacific also noted feeding on jellyfish. ,First breeds at age of 6-12 years. Breeds in colonies. Unlike many related birds; fulmars are active around nesting colonies in daylight. Birds at nest site display in variety of situations by opening bill wide; waving head back and forth while calling. Mated pairs nibble at each other's head and bill. Nest:  Site is on ledge of cliff; or hollow in bank or slope. No nest formed on rock ledge; but on soil makes shallow scrape; sometimes adding pebbles as lining. 
Northern-Gannet,Morus bassanus,Boobies and Gannets,Oceanic; often well offshore. Breeds colonially on sea cliffs. Forages at sea; from fairly close inshore to out of sight of land; but mostly over waters of continental shelf. In cold-water areas in summer; but winters to edge of tropics. Nests on cliffs and ledges of islands; sometimes on steep protected cliffs of mainland.,Forages by plunging headfirst into water; sometimes from more than 100' above surface. Also forages while swimming; submerging head to peer below surface and then diving and swimming underwater. May take food at surface; or may steal food from other birds.,One. Pale blue to white; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; 42-46 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Age at first flight 84-97 days. Only one young raised per year.,Mainly fish. Feeds mostly on small fish (1-12" in length) of types that live in dense schools; including herring; sand lance; cod; pollack; menhaden. Also may eat some squid. Sometimes scavenges for scraps and offal around fishing boats. ,Usually first breeds at age of 5-6 years; and may mate for life. Breeds in tightly packed colonies; with much competition for prime nest sites. Male claims nest territory and displays to attract mate; with exaggerated sideways shaking of head. Mated pairs greet each other by standing face to face; wings out; knocking bills together and bowing. Nest:  Site is on ledge or flat ground; often within 2-3 feet of other nesting gannets. Nest (built mostly by male) is pile of grass; seaweed; dirt; feathers; compacted and held together by droppings; used by same pair for years and gradually building up to tall mound. 
Northern-Goshawk,Accipiter gentilis,Hawks and Eagles,Coniferous and mixed forests. Generally restricted to wooded areas; but may be in relatively open woods or along edges. Often more common as a breeding bird in mixed woods than in pure stands of coniferous trees. During winter incursions to the south; may be found in any forest type.,Hunts by perching quietly at mid-levels in trees; watching for prey; often moving from one perch to another. When prey is spotted; hawk attacks with a short flight; putting on a great burst of speed and often plunging through tangled branches and thickets in pursuit of quarry. Sometimes searches for prey by flying low through woods.,2-4; rarely 5. Bluish white; fading to white. Incubation is mostly by female; 32-38 days; male brings food to her. Young: Female remains with young most of time at first; male brings food; and female feeds it to young. Adults (especially female) very bold in defense of nest; diving at intruders; including humans; and sometimes drawing blood. Age of young at first flight about 5-6 weeks.,Mostly birds and small mammals. Feeds on many medium-sized birds; such as grouse and crows; also many squirrels; rabbits; snowshoe hares. Also eats some small birds; small rodents; snakes; insects. ,May mate for life. In display over nesting territory; adult glides and circles; often with fluffy white feathers under tail spread out to sides; also may do a series of shallow dives and upward flights. Male provides most or all food for female; beginning before eggs are laid. Nest site is in tree; often in deciduous tree in mixed forest; at a major crotch in the trunk. Height varies; commonly 25-50' above ground; sometimes 15-75' up. Nest (built mostly by female) is platform of sticks; lined with finer material; including green foliage. Nest may be reused; with more material added each year; becoming quite large. 
Northern-Harrier,Circus hudsonius,Hawks and Eagles,Marshes; fields; prairies. Found in many kinds of open terrain; both wet and dry habitats; where there is good ground cover. Often found in marshes; especially in nesting season; but sometimes will nest in dry open fields.,Usually hunts by flying low over fields; scanning the ground; males tend to fly lower and faster than females. May find some prey by sound. On locating prey in dense cover; may hover low over site or attempt to drive prey out into open.,4-6; sometimes 2-7; rarely more. Pale bluish-white; fading to white and becoming nest-stained; sometimes spotted with pale brown. Incubation is by female only; 30-32 days. Young: Female remains with young most of time at first; male brings food and delivers it to female; who feeds it to young. After young are about 2 weeks old; female does much of the hunting for them. Young may move short distances away from nest after about a week; but return to nest to be fed; are able to fly at about 30-35 days.,Mostly small mammals and birds. Diet varies with location and season. Often specializes on voles; rats; or other rodents; also takes other mammals; up to size of small rabbits. May eat many birds; from songbirds up to size of flickers; doves; small ducks. Also eats large insects (especially grasshoppers); snakes; lizards; toads; frogs. May feed on carrion; especially in winter. ,Often nests in loose colonies; one male may have two or more mates. In courtship; male flies up and then dives; repeatedly; in a roller-coaster pattern. Nest site is on ground in dense field or marsh; sometimes low over shallow water. Nest built mostly by female; with male supplying some material. Nest may be shallow depression lined with grass; or platform of sticks; grass; weeds. 
Northern-Hawk-Owl,Surnia ulula,Superb Owls,Open conifer forests; birch scrub; tamarack bogs; muskeg. Found in northern forest of spruce and other conifers mixed with aspen or birch; north to treeline. Generally in semi-open sites; as around edges of clearings; bogs; burned areas.,Hunts mostly by day; or at dawn and dusk. Watches for prey from a prominent raised perch; often moving from one hunting perch to another; when prey is spotted; attacks in very fast flight. May hover while hunting. Sometimes catches birds in the air. May sometimes locate prey by sound alone; plunging into snow to catch unseen rodents.,5-7; sometimes 4-9; rarely 3-13. May lay more eggs in years when rodents are abundant. Eggs white. Incubation is by female only; 25-30 days. Young: Female stays with young most of time for about first 2 weeks; male brings food for them. Later; both parents bring food. Young climb around in nest tree before capable of flight; may be able to fly at about 5-6 weeks. Young may remain with parents for several months after fledging.,Mostly rodents. Especially in summer; eats mostly voles; mice; also some small squirrels; weasels; shrews. Also eats small birds; especially in winter. May take insects; frogs; even small fish at times. ,Members of mated pair call in duet; sometimes bow stiffly. Male feeds female; and may store uneaten prey near nest. Nest site varies; includes large cavities in trees; broken-off tops of snags; or old nests of other birds; such as crows or hawks. In northern Europe; may use artificial nest boxes. Usually 10-40' above ground. 
Northern-Jacana,Jacana spinosa,Jacanas,Marshes; overgrown ponds. In the tropics; found on wide variety of shallow freshwater ponds and lake margins; especially those with much floating vegetation. In United States; has occurred mostly in Texas; on large fresh ponds surrounded by extensive marsh and with floating plants such as lily pads; water hyacinth.,Forages by walking about on mats of floating vegetation; picking insects from surface of plants or water; sometimes from just below water's surface. Also forages on mud or open ground near water.,Usually 4; sometimes 3-5. Almost round; brown; scrawled with black lines. Incubation is by male only; 22-24 days. During hot part of day; male will shade eggs from sun (female occasionally shades eggs also). Young: Downy young leave nest within 1-2 days after hatching. Male tends young and leads them to feeding sites; but young feed themselves; male broods young during rain or cool weather. Female sometimes accompanies or broods young; but always far less than male. Age at first flight about 4 weeks.,Mostly insects. Diet in Texas not well known. In Costa Rica; reported to feed almost entirely on insects; occasionally eats small fish. ,One female may have up to 4 mates; she lays eggs in separate nests for each; and males do almost all the work of incubating the eggs and caring for the young. Nest site is on top of marsh vegetation; either standing or floating; in shallow water. Nest (built by male) is a flimsy and simple open cup made of available plant material; male continues to add to nest during incubation period. 
Northern-Lapwing,Vanellus vanellus,Plovers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Northern-Mockingbird,Mimus polyglottos,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Towns; farms; roadsides; thickets; brushy areas. Favors areas with dense low shrubs and open ground; either short grass or open soil; thus often common around suburban hedges and lawns. Also in many kinds of second growth; woodland edges; farmland. In west; often very numerous in desert thickets or streamsides in canyons.,Captures insects mostly while walking and running on ground. Also watches from low perch and flies down to capture items on ground below. Perches in shrubs and trees to eat berries.,3-4; sometimes 2-6. Variably greenish to bluish gray; with blotches of brown usually concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 12 days after hatching; not able to fly well for about another week. 2-3 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Annual diet is about half insects and other arthropods; half berries and fruits. Feeds heavily on insects in late spring and summer; especially beetles; grasshoppers; caterpillars; ants; wasps; also many others. Also eats spiders; snails; sowbugs; earthworms; and rarely crayfish and small lizards. Fall and winter diet leans heavily to berries and wild fruits; sometimes a few cultivated fruits. ,Nesting begins early; by late winter in southern areas. Male sings to defend territory and attract a mate; often leaping a few feet in the air and flapping his wings while singing. Early stage of courtship involves male and female chasing each other rapidly around territory. Nest: Placed in a dense shrub or tree; usually 3-10' above the ground; sometimes lower or higher (rarely up to 60'). Nest has bulky foundation of twigs supporting open cup of weeds; grass; leaves; lined with fine material such as rootlets; moss; animal hair; plant down. Male builds most of foundation; female adds most of lining. 
Northern-Parula,Setophaga americana,Wood Warblers,Breeds mainly in humid woods where either Usnea or Spanish Moss hangs from the trees (but also in some woods where neither is found.)  Nests mainly in humid coniferous and deciduous forests; especially those with abundant tree lichens; in swamps or along edges of ponds; lakes; or slow-moving streams. In migration and winter; frequents almost any kind of trees.,Forages rather sedately. Searches among leaves; and hovers to take insects from foliage; sometimes hanging upside down on twigs like a chickadee or on trunk like a nuthatch. Occasionally darts out after flying insects; or forages on ground.,4-5; occasionally 3-7. Whitish; variably marked with brown. Incubated by both parents; but mostly by female; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed young; but male may do more. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known.,Mostly insects. Feeds on small beetles; flies; moths; caterpillars; egg clusters; true bugs; ants; bees; wasps; and other insects; also spiders. Also eats some small berries. May feed nestlings many soft green larvae. ,Pairs often return to same nesting site year after year. Males sing during migration and throughout nesting season; even when feeding young. Nest: Placed usually in a hollow excavated in hanging tree lichens (Usnea) or Spanish moss; 4-50' above the ground. When no lichens or Spanish moss available; also constructed of dangling clumps of twigs or pine needles; or placed in rubbish left by floods in branches hanging over stream. Nest is small hanging pouch of lichen and twigs; unlined or lined sparsely with soft shreds of moss; grass; pine needles; and hair. Built solely by female; but male accompanies her on trips to the nest. 
Northern-Pintail,Anas acuta,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; prairies; fresh ponds; lakes; salt bays. Summers in wide variety of open habitats; including prairies; farmland; northern tundra; near bodies of water. In migration and winter around any shallow waters with exposed mudflats; including fresh and brackish marshes; lakes; flooded fields.,Forages in shallow water by up-ending with tail up and head down; or by submerging head and neck while swimming; finding most food in underwater mud. Also forages by walking on land.,7-10; sometimes 6-12. Pale olive. Incubation is by female only; 21-25 days. Young: female leads young from nest within a few hours after they hatch. Young feed themselves. Capable of flight at 38-52 days after hatching; in far north; where continuous daylight allows for feeding at all hours; young may develop faster.,Mostly seeds; insects. Diet mostly plant material in fall and winter; especially seeds of grasses; sedges; pondweeds; and others; and waste grain in fields. In spring and summer also feeds on roots and new growth. More animal matter in summer; mainly insects; mollusks; crustaceans; sometimes tadpoles; small fish. Young ducklings eat mostly insects. ,Pair formation begins on winter range and continues during spring migration; with some birds perhaps not paired until after arrival on breeding grounds. Several males often court one female; leading to pursuit flights. Nest site is on dry ground among short vegetation; usually near water but can be up to 1/2 mile away; often more exposed than nests of other ducks. Nest (built by female) a shallow depression lined with grasses; twigs; leaves; with addition of down. 
Northern-Pygmy-Owl,Glaucidium gnoma,Superb Owls,Open coniferous or mixed woods; wooded canyons. Found in a wide variety of forest types; including open oak groves; sycamores in canyons; pine-oak woodland; coniferous forest of far north and high mountains. Generally in partly open habitats rather than solid unbroken forest.,Hunts most actively near dawn and dusk; but also at other times. Watches for prey from a perch; then makes very rapid pursuit flight.,3-4; sometimes 2-7. White. Incubation apparently is by female only; about 28 days.   Young: Both parents take part in providing food for young; with male bringing much of prey; female feeding it to young. Female may roost in nest hole with young at first. Age of young at first flight about 27-28 days.,Includes rodents; birds; insects; lizards. Diet varies with location and season. Rodents such as voles and mice are often major prey; also catches mammals as large as gophers and squirrels. During warm weather; eats many large insects such as grasshoppers; crickets; cicadas; beetles. Small songbirds are sometimes up to one-third of diet. In southern parts of range; may catch many lizards. ,Some birds defend territories all year; in breeding season; pairs defend very large nesting territories. Courtship displays at dusk may involve rapid aerial chases through the trees near potential nest sites. In courtship on perch; male feeds female. Nest site is in cavity in tree; either in natural hollow or (perhaps more often) in abandoned woodpecker hole; and usually 8-25' above ground. 
Northern-Red-Bishop,Euplectes franciscanus,,Widespread in semi-open habitats; including brushy thickets; overgrown fields; and the edges of marshes and ponds. ,Usually forages in small flocks; feeding on the ground or in dense low cover. ,2-4 plain blue eggs. Incubation is by the female; about 2 weeks. Young: Female feeds the young in the nest for about 2 weeks until they fledge. ,Feeds mainly on seeds; especially those of grasses; also some insects.,Male performs a courtship display by flying about slowly over his territory with his red and black body plumage fully puffed out. The male builds the nest; a spherical mass of plant stems with the entrance on the side; and the female adds finer material inside to line the nest. 
Northern-Rough-winged-Swallow,Stelgidopteryx serripennis,Swallows,Near streams; lakes; river banks; also arroyos in dry country. Widespread in any kind of open country; but most commonly near water; nesting in vertical dirt banks (as along streambanks; river bluffs; gravel pits). May also nest along dry washes in arid country; but usually feeds over water; fields; or dense brush.,Forages mostly in the air; patrolling over rivers; ponds; and fields in swift flight. Usually forages low. Often solitary in foraging; but may join concentrations of other swallows at good feeding areas.,5-7; sometimes 4-8. White. Incubation probably by female; 12-16 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 19-21 days after hatching. 1 brood per year.,Insects. Feeds on a wide variety of flying insects; including many flies; wasps; winged ants; bees; true bugs; and beetles. Also eats some moths; caterpillars; mayflies; damselflies; spiders. ,Solitary in nesting; unlike Bank Swallow; does not form colonies; although several pairs may nest in favorable site. In courtship; male flies after female; spreading the white feathers under the base of his tail so that they are prominently displayed. Nest site is usually in burrow in vertical dirt bank; may be bank along running stream; or road cut or similar bank miles from water. Birds may dig tunnel themselves; 1-6' long; or may use old burrow of Bank Swallow; kingfisher; or ground squirrel. Sometimes in other kinds of cavities; such as drainpipe; culvert; crevice in bridge support; hole in side of building. Bulky nest at end of burrow made of twigs; weeds; bark fibers; lined with finer grasses; occasionally with fresh horse manure added. 
Northern-Saw-whet-Owl,Aegolius acadicus,Superb Owls,Forests; conifers; groves. Breeds most commonly in coniferous forest of various kinds; including open pine forest; spruce-fir associations; white cedar swamps; also mixed woods such as pine-oak; spruce-poplar; and others. In some places; breeds in oak woodland or in streamside groves in arid country. Winters in habitats with dense cover; especially groves of conifers.,Hunts almost entirely at night; mostly by waiting on low perches and then swooping down on prey. Finds its prey both by sound and by sight.,5-6; sometimes 4-7; rarely 3-9. White. Incubation is by female only; 27-29 days. Female remains in nest almost constantly from time first egg is laid; male brings food to her throughout this time. Young: At first; adult male brings all food to nest; female feeds it to young. Female remains with chicks until youngest is about 18 days old; then she may begin to hunt for them also; or may depart. Young leave nest at about 4-5 weeks; remain together near nest and are fed (mostly by male) for at least another 4 weeks. Female may sometimes find another mate and nest a second time in one year.,Mostly small rodents. Feeds mostly on mice that live in forest; especially deer mice; also many voles. Also eats other mice; shrews; young squirrels; sometimes small birds and large insects. Resident race on Queen Charlotte Islands; British Columbia; may eat crustaceans and insects in intertidal zone. ,Early in breeding season; male sings incessantly at night to defend territory and attract a mate. Nest site is in cavity in tree; usually 15-60' above ground. Mostly use abandoned woodpeckers holes; especially those of flickers and Pileated Woodpeckers. Will also use artificial nest boxes. Apparently will not use same site two years in a row. 
Northern-Shoveler,Spatula clypeata,Ducks and Geese,Marshes; ponds; in winter; also salt bays. In summer in open country such as prairie; marsh; or tundra; in vicinity of shallow water. In migration and winter on alkaline lakes; fresh marshes; tidal estuaries; or any shallow waters with extensive muddy margins; including stagnant or polluted waters not much favored by other ducks.,Forages mainly by swimming slowly forward with the bill skimming the surface or with the head partly submerged; often swinging the bill from side to side as it sifts food from the muddy water. Seldom up-ends; rarely dives; seldom feeds on land.,9-12; sometimes 6-14. Shades of pale olive. If first clutch of eggs is destroyed; replacement clutch usually has fewer eggs. Incubation is by female only; 21-27 days. Young: within a few hours after eggs hatch; female leads young to water; generally keeping them close to cover of marsh vegetation. Young are capable of flight 52-60 days after hatching.,Varies with season and habitat. In winter may feed mostly on seeds and other parts of aquatic plants; such as sedges; pondweeds; grasses; and others. Also (especially in summer) eats mollusks; insects; crustaceans; sometimes small fish. ,Pair formation begins in winter and continues during spring migration. Several males may court one female; gathering around her on water. Each male in turn attempts to lead female away; by swimming away or by short flight; female indicates acceptance by flying away with male. Male remains with female longer than in most ducks; often through part of incubation period. Nest site is usually close to water; generally in area of short grass. Nest (built by female) is a shallow depression partly filled with dried grasses and weeds; lined with down. 
Northern-Shrike,Lanius borealis,Shrikes,Semi-open country with lookout posts; trees; scrub. Breeds in far north in partly open or scattered spruce woods and in willow and alder scrub along streams or edges of tundra. Winters in similar semi-open areas; sometimes in open grassland with a few high perches; but seems to prefer some brushy areas nearby.,Forages by watching from an exposed perch; then darting out in swift; powerful flight after prey is spotted. Uses its heavy hooked bill to kill its prey; although small birds attacked in flight may be forced to the ground first with the shrike's feet. Dead prey is sometimes impaled on a thorn and then eaten later.,Clutch size varies; often 4-7 eggs; up to 9 in Alaska. Eggs pale gray or greenish white; spotted with brown; olive; and gray. Incubation is probably mostly or entirely by female; about 15-17 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 19-20 days after hatching; are tended by parents for several more weeks.,Includes small birds; rodents; large insects. Varied diet includes many small songbirds; especially in winter and early spring; also many voles and other small rodents; and many large insects when available. Especially in Eurasia; also known to eat lizards; frogs; snakes. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory and perhaps to attract a mate; giving a surprisingly complex song that includes imitations of other birds. Nest: Placed in a low tree or large shrub; often in spruce or willow; usually 6-15' above the ground. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a loosely made; bulky; open cup of twigs; grass; bark strips; moss; lined with feathers and animal hair. 
Northern-Waterthrush,Parkesia noveboracensis,Wood Warblers,Swampy or wet woods; streamsides; lake shores; in migration; also thickets. Breeds mostly in coniferous forests with standing or sluggish water; as found in shrubby bogs and edges of northern lakes; less often along swift streams. In migration; may appear in any habitat; more frequent in thickets along edges of water. In winter in tropics; often in coastal mangrove swamps.,Walks on ground and wades in shallow water. Often forages on half-submerged logs. Uncovers prey by tossing aside dead and soggy leaves found in rock crevices. Defends winter feeding territories against other waterthrushes.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Whitish; with brown; purple-gray spots and blotches. Incubation is by female; 12-13 days. In southern part of range; often parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Fed by both parents. Young leave the nest approximately 10 days after hatching; can fly well by about a week later.,Aquatic and terrestrial insects; crustaceans. Feeds mainly on insects; including water beetles; water bugs; flea beetles; damselflies; weevils; mosquitoes; ants; fly pupae; caterpillars; moths; also some slugs; snails; crustaceans; and occasionally small fish. Takes mostly insects in winter; also some small crustaceans and other invertebrates. ,Males sing throughout the breeding season; not ceasing after pair formation; song apparently serves to defend territory. Sometimes sings in flight. Nest site is usually in a small hollow in a moss-covered stump; under a jutting bank; or 0-2' above the ground in roots of uprooted tree; typically very near water. Nest is in shape of open cup; often well hidden among ferns. Constructed by female of leaf skeletons; sphagnum moss; pine needles; twigs; inner bark; and lined with soft material such as red moss filaments. 
Northern-Wheatear,Oenanthe oenanthe,Old World Flycatchers,In summer; rocky tundra; barren slopes. Breeds on dry northern tundra with many exposed rocks and boulders; especially where these are near mats of dwarf shrubs a few inches high. Migrants may be seen on any kind of open ground; including vacant lots; barren fields; coastal meadows. In Eurasia; very widespread in open country.,Forages mostly on the ground; running short distances and then stopping to pick up items. May run and flutter in pursuit of active insects. Also often watches from a perch a couple of feet up; then flies down take item on ground. Sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air.,5-6; sometimes 3-8. Pale blue; either unmarked or with fine reddish brown dots at larger end. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; but female may do more. Young leave nest about 15 days after hatching. Probably 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects; some berries. Diet in North America not known in detail. In Eurasia feeds mostly on insects; especially beetles; also ants; caterpillars; grasshoppers; true bugs; flies; and many others. Also eats spiders; centipedes; snails. Often feeds on berries; perhaps mainly in summer and fall. ,Male defends territory by singing; often in song-flight display. Song often includes imitations of other birds. In one courtship display; female crouches on ground while male leaps back and forth above her; very rapidly; with wings and tail spread. Also other postures and displays; many showing off tail pattern. Nest site is on ground on dry tundra; usually in hole under rock; in crevice among large stones; or in old rodent burrow. Nest; probably built by female; is placed within this shelter; variable cup of grass; twigs; weeds; lined with finer material such as moss; lichens; rootlets; fine grass. 
Northwestern-Crow,Corvus caurinus,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Near tidewater; shores. Generally found close to the immediate coastline. Often along open beaches; rocky shores; tidal estuaries; coastal ponds; inshore islands. Also forages in woods and fields close to shore. Only occasionally moves to fields several miles inland.,Forages mostly while walking on ground or in very shallow water; also sometimes forages in trees. May concentrate at salmon runs along with other birds. Flies up into the air carrying mussels; and drops them on rocks to break them open. May store food on territory and retrieve it later.,4-5. Dull blue-green to gray-green; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is by female only; about 18 days. Young: Fed by both parents; and sometimes by one-year-old "helpers."  Age when young leave the nest not well known; probably close to 4 weeks.,Omnivorous. Seems to feed on anything it can find in its habitat; including fish; crabs; shellfish; carrion; garbage; various insects; berries; nuts; seeds; and birds' eggs (especially in seabird colonies). ,Usually solitary in nesting; not in colonies. Offspring from previous year may remain on nesting territory of adult pair; these "helpers" assist in mobbing predators; may or may not assist with feeding the nestlings. Nest site is usually in fork of tree or shrub; sometimes placed on the ground (sheltered by rocks) on islands. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky platform of sticks; bark; plant fibers; and mud; lined with softer material such as grass; animal fur; and rootlets. 
Nuttalls-Woodpecker,Dryobates nuttallii,Woodpeckers,Wooded canyons and foothills; river woods. In much of range almost always around oaks; especially where oaks meet other trees along rivers; also in pine-oak woods in foothills. In southern California also in riverside cottonwoods; sycamores; willows; even if no oaks present. At eastern edge of range may venture out into mesquite or other dry woods.,Forages mainly in dense trees such as oaks and ceanothus; also in cottonwood; willow; sycamore; and others; sometimes in yuccas; mesquites (at eastern margin of range). The sexes sometimes forage differently in trees; with males focussing on trunk and major limbs; females working on minor branches and twigs. Occasionally catches insects in flight.,3-4; up to 6. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Young leave nest about 4 weeks after hatching; may remain with parents for several weeks thereafter.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; especially beetles; also caterpillars; ants; true bugs. Also eats some nuts; seeds; fruits; berries. Despite close association with oaks; eats only small numbers of acorns. ,Members of pair may remain more or less together all year. Displays include raising head feathers; swinging head from side to side; and a fluttering display flight. Nest site is cavity in live or dead tree; usually cottonwood; willow; or sycamore near oak woods; sometimes in utility pole; fence post; or oak or other tree. Cavity usually 3-35' above ground; sometimes up to 60' or higher. Male does most of excavating; new nest cavity every year. 
Nuttings-Flycatcher,Myiarchus nuttingi,Tyrant Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Oak-Titmouse,Baeolophus inornatus,Chickadees and Titmice,Oak woods; pinyon-juniper; locally river woods; shade trees. Along Pacific seaboard; occurs most commonly in oak woodland; including areas where oaks meet streamside trees or pines; also in well-wooded suburbs; rarely in coniferous forest in mountains. In the interior; also occurs in some woodlands dominated by pine or juniper.,Forages by hopping about in branches and larger twigs of trees; sometimes hanging upside down; searching for insects among the foliage and on the bark. Opens nuts and acorns by holding them with feet and pounding with bill. Comes to bird feeders for seeds or suet.,Usually 6-7; sometimes 3-9. White; sometimes lightly dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; 14-16 days. Young: Both parents bring food to nestlings. Young leave nest about 16-21 days after hatching.,Insects; nuts; seeds. Feeds mainly on insects; including many caterpillars; beetles; true bugs; leafhoppers; aphids; scale insects; and many others; as well as some spiders. Also eats acorns; weed seeds; and sometimes berries or small fruits. ,Pairs or family groups may defend territories all year. Nest site (selected by female) is usually in hole in tree; sometimes hole in stump; fence post; or pole. May be natural cavity or old woodpecker hole. In rotten wood; both members of pair may work to enlarge small cavities for their use. Also will use nest boxes; and sometimes crevices in buildings or other cavities. Nest has foundation of grass; weeds; moss; bark fibers; and lining of soft material such as feathers or animal hair. 
Olive-Sparrow,Arremonops rufivirgatus,New World Sparrows,Woodland undergrowth; weedy thickets. In southern Texas; lives in the understory of dense low woods and in areas of low native brush. Farther south in the tropics; inhabits drier woods and semi-open scrub; avoiding humid tropical forest.,Does at least the majority of its feeding on the ground; under dense thickets or near their edges. Often forages rather like a towhee; scratching with its feet among the leaf-litter. Members of a pair may forage together.,3-5; typically 4. Glossy white; unmarked. Incubation period and roles of the parents in incubating are not well known. Young: Probably both parents feed the nestlings. Pairs probably raise 2 broods per year.,Probably insects and seeds. Diet is thought to be mainly insects (including caterpillars) and the seeds of wild plants. ,Little is known of the nesting habits. Birds may remain in pairs or small groups during the winter; separating into isolated pairs in spring. Males sing in spring to defend nesting territories. Nest site is in dense thickets; usually placed in shrub or cactus; typically 2-3' above ground but sometimes up to 5' high. Nest is large for size of bird; a bulky cup with a domed top above it; so that entrance is on the side; made of dry weed stems; grass; twigs; leaves; strips of bark; lined with fine grass and sometimes with hair. 
Olive-Warbler,Peucedramus taeniatus,Olive Warblers,Pine and fir forests of high mountains. Breeds in mountain pine forests; generally at elevations of 6;000' and above. Prefers ponderosa pine; but also occurs in other pines; firs; Douglas-firs; and in adjacent oaks. In winter; at least some individuals move down into oak woodlands in lower foothills.,Usually forages in the upper one-third of pines and other trees. Creeps over branches and twigs of pines; taking insects from the twigs and from the bases of needle clusters. When not breeding; often seen foraging in mixed flocks including other warblers and also titmice; nuthatches; and other birds.,Usually 3-4. Bluish-white with olive and brown marks at large end. Female incubates (and male might also?); but length of incubation period and roles of the parents are poorly known. Young: Probably both parents feed the nestlings; but details (including age at which young leave the nest) are not well known.,Probably mostly insects. Details of the diet are not well known. Has been observed feeding on insects; and these undoubtedly make up majority of food. ,Details of breeding behavior not well studied; partly owing to the placement of its nest in the upper reaches of trees. Nest: Placed from 30'-70' up; usually in pine; and usually 15-20' out from the trunk on a branch. Nest (built by female) is an open cup of moss; lichen; pine bud scales; pine needles; lined with the soft white plant fibers from the underside of silver oak leaves; and rootlets. 
Olive-backed-Pipit,Anthus hodgsoni,Wagtails and Pipits,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Olive-sided-Flycatcher,Contopus cooperi,Tyrant Flycatchers,Conifer forests; burns; clearings. Breeds mostly in coniferous forest of the north and the higher mountains; especially around the edges of open areas including bogs; ponds; clearings. Also nests near the coast in California; in tall trees (including eucalyptus) in foothill canyons.,Forages by watching from a high; exposed perch; often on a dead branch at very top of tree; flying out to catch passing insects in the air; then returning to its perch to eat them. Always or almost always takes insects in mid-air; not from foliage or ground.,3; rarely 2-4. White to pinkish buff; with brown and gray spots concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; 16-17 days; sometimes reported as 14 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Age of young at first flight about 21-23 days.,Insects. Apparently feeds almost entirely on flying insects. In summer; a high percentage of these are various kinds of wasps; winged ants; and bees; including many honeybees. Also eats beetles; grasshoppers; true bugs; moths; and others. Winter diet not well known. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing incessantly in spring. Courtship behavior not well known; probably involves active chasing through the treetops. Nest site is in tree; usually on horizontal branch well out from the trunk. Conifers preferred in most areas; but in other areas will often nest in deciduous trees; height also quite variable; 5-70' above ground. Nest usually well hidden among dense twigs or needles. Nest (probably built by female) a flat open cup of twigs; grass; weeds; lined with finer materials. 
Orange-crowned-Warbler,Leiothlypis celata,Wood Warblers,Brushy clearings; aspens; undergrowth. Breeds in shrubby vegetation; usually deciduous undergrowth in various habitats; including spruce forest; fir-aspen forest; streamside thickets; or chaparral with partly shaded ground. During migration and winter; uses brushy tangles in similar habitat; including gardens and parks.,Forages by flitting from perch to perch; taking insects from foliage and flowers; often fairly low. Will hover to take prey from underside of leaves; or sally out from perch for flying insects. Pierces bases of flowers with its bill to take nectar.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White or creamy; with reddish-brown speckles mostly at larger end. Only females incubate; 11-13 days. Young: Fed by both parents; but brooded only by female. Leave nest at age of 10-13 days; when they still fly poorly. Both parents feed young for at least a few days after they leave nest. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects; some berries. In summer eats mostly insects; feeding nestlings almost exclusively on insect larvae. In winter; will feed on oozing sap from wells drilled in tree bark by sapsuckers or other woodpeckers. On tropical wintering grounds; feeds on insects; nectar; and berries. Will take suet and peanut butter from feeders. ,Males arrive on breeding grounds before females; and establish territory by singing. Typically males return to territories defended the previous year. Nest: Nest site is protected from above by overhanging vegetation; usually on the ground in small depressions or on steep banks. Occasionally low in shrubby bushes or trees. Female builds small; open cup nest of leaves; fine twigs; bark; coarse grass and moss; lined with dry grass or animal hair. Male does not help with nest building; but accompanies the female closely. 
Orchard-Oriole,Icterus spurius,Blackbirds and Orioles,Wood edges; orchards; shade trees. Breeds in semi-open habitats with deciduous trees and open space; including riverside trees; orchards; suburbs; forest edges and clearings; prairie groves. Usually avoids unbroken forest. Winters in brushy areas and woodland edges in lowlands of the tropics.,Forages mostly by searching for insects among the foliage of trees and bushes. Regularly visits flowers; probing in the blossoms with its bill. In winter in the tropics; often forages in flocks.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. Pale bluish white; blotched with brown; gray; purple. Incubation is probably mostly or entirely by the female; about 12-15 days; reportedly; the male may feed the female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 11-14 days after hatching; may remain with one or both parents for several weeks. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects; some berries and nectar. Diet in summer is mostly insects; especially caterpillars; beetles; and grasshoppers; plus many others; also spiders. Eats some berries; perhaps more in fall and winter. Often feeds on nectar; and may eat parts of flowers. ,Male sings in spring to attract a mate. Often not strongly territorial; in some cases; more than one pair may nest in the same tree. Also sometimes nests in the same tree with Eastern Kingbirds. Nest site is in tree (usually deciduous) or tall shrub; rarely in tall dense marsh growth. Often 10-20' above ground; can be much lower or higher (3-70' up); typically placed in fork of horizontal branch; sometimes in clump of Spanish moss or other site. Nest (built by female; possibly with help from male) is a hanging pouch or basket; not as deep as some oriole nests; woven of grass and plant fibers; lined with fine grass and plant down. 
Oriental-Turtle-Dove,Streptopelia orientalis,Pigeons and Doves,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Osprey,Pandion haliaetus,Ospreys,Rivers; lakes; coast. Found near water; either fresh or salt; where large numbers of fish are present. May be most common around major coastal estuaries and salt marshes; but also regular around large lakes; reservoirs; rivers. Migrating Ospreys are sometimes seen far from water; even over the desert.,Flies slowly over water; pausing to hover when fish spotted below; if fish is close enough to surface; the Osprey plunges feet-first; grasping prey in its talons.,3; sometimes 2-4. Creamy white; blotched with brown. Incubation is by both parents but mostly by female; about 38 days. Young: Female remains with young most of time at first; sheltering them from sun and rain; male brings fish; female feeds them to young. Age of young at first flight averages about 51-54 days. 1 brood per year.,Almost entirely fish. Typically feeds on fish 4-12" long. Type of fish involved varies with region; concentrates on species common in each locale; such as flounder; smelt; mullet; bullhead; sucker; gizzard shad. Aside from fish; rarely eats small mammals; birds; or reptiles; perhaps mainly when fish are scarce. ,Courtship displays include pair circling high together; male may fly high and then dive repeatedly in vicinity of nest site; often carrying a fish or stick. Nest site is usually on top of large tree (often with dead or broken top) not far from water. Also nests on utility poles; duck blinds; other structures; including poles put up for them. May nest on ground on small islands; or on cliffs or giant cactus in western Mexico. Site typically very open to sky. Nest (built by both sexes) is bulky pile of sticks; lined with smaller materials. Birds may use same nest for years; adding material each year; so that nest becomes huge. 
Ovenbird,Seiurus aurocapilla,Wood Warblers,Near ground in leafy woods; in migration; thickets. Needs large tracts of mature deciduous or mixed forest for successful breeding. Will nest in a wide variety of forest types; as long as they have a closed canopy cover; large trees; and little ground cover. In winter (mostly in tropics); lives in forests and thickets; from dry lowlands to wet forests in the foothills.,Takes insects from leaf litter while walking on ground and rotting logs. (Young Ovenbirds pass through a stage of hopping while they forage.)  Sometimes probes among leaf litter; hovers to take insects from foliage; or catches them in mid-air. Individuals probably defend feeding territories in winter.,Normally 4-5. White with gray and brown spots. Incubation by female only; fed sometimes by male. Cowbirds parasitize many nests; but Ovenbird nestlings often survive even when sharing the nest with young cowbirds. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest after 7-10 days; can only hop and flutter at this stage; fed by adults for another 10-20 days. 1 brood per year; but has been known to produce up to 3 broods in response to a spruce budworm outbreak.,Mostly insects. During summer; feeds on a wide variety of insects including adult beetles and their larvae; ants; caterpillars; flies; true bugs; and others; also worms; spiders; snails. Winter diet not well known; but reportedly includes seeds and other vegetable matter. ,Male sings to attract female to nesting territory; and sings only sporadically during actual courtship. Male threatens rival males by tilting tail upward; drooping wings; and kneading with feet. Nest: Placed on the ground where ground cover is sparse; especially near trails or roads. Female chooses site; builds domed nest from dead leaves; grass; bark; twigs; lines it with animal hair. 
Pacific-Golden-Plover,Pluvialis fulva,Plovers,Tundra (summer); short-grass fields; mudflats; shores during migration. During migration; often on extensive areas of short grass; flooded pastures; as well as on mudflats; beaches. In winter in Hawaii; often forages on lawns. In western Alaska; where the two golden-plovers overlap in summer; the Pacific typically nests at lower elevations than the American; on wetter tundra with taller vegetation.,Typically they walk or run a few steps and then pause; then move forward again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible.,4. Pale buff to cinnamon; boldly blotched with black and brown; well camouflaged when seen against varied tundra vegetation. Incubation is by both parents; about 25 days. Male reportedly incubates by day; female at night. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Both parents tend young; but young find all their own food. Age at first flight about 26-28 days.,Mostly insects; also mollusks; crustaceans; berries. On breeding grounds; feeds mostly on insects; including beetles; flies; and others; also some berries. In migration in open fields; eats wide variety of insects; including grasshoppers; caterpillars. On shores; also feeds on small crustaceans and mollusks. During migration seasons; may eat many berries. ,Males perform flight display over breeding territory by flying high; with exaggerated slow; deep wingbeats; while giving a repeated; plaintive teee-chewee whistle. Nest site is on ground; on dry ground often surrounded by wet tundra. Nest (probably built by male) is shallow depression in tundra; lined with lichens; moss; grass; leaves. 
Pacific-Loon,Gavia pacifica,Loons,Ocean; open water; in summer; tundra lakes. Breeds mainly on lakes surrounded by tundra; also lakes within forested country; often overlaps with Red-throated Loon; but requires larger and deeper bodies of water. In winter; mostly on ocean; often farther from shore than Red-throated or Common loons.,Forages by diving from surface and swimming underwater; propelled mainly by feet. May dip head into water repeatedly; looking for prey; before diving.,2; sometimes 1; rarely 3. Brown; with blackish-brown spots. Both sexes incubate (although female does more); 23-25 days. Young:  Leave nest shortly after hatching; return to nest for resting and sleeping during first few days. Both parents feed young. Adults may fly several miles from nesting territory to other waters to feed and to bring back food for young. Age at first flight probably 60-65 days. One brood per year.,Includes fish; crustaceans; insects. Diet varies with place and season. Apparently eats mostly small fish when these are available; especially in winter and on ocean. Also eats crustaceans; mollusks; aquatic insects; and some plant material; especially during breeding season. ,May mate for life. Courtship displays include ritualized bill-dipping and splash-diving by both members of pair. Less aerial display than in Red-throated Loon. Very aggressive in defense of nesting territory; and has been seen to kill ducklings that strayed near nest. Nest:  Site is almost always at edge of water; on shore or island; sometimes in shallow water. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a heap of vegetation pulled up from around nest site; sometimes mixed with mud or with mud foundation; may rarely build floating nest. 
Pacific-Wren,Troglodytes pacificus,Wrens,Dense coniferous forests; also more open habitats on Alaskan islands; woodlands and brush in winter in the southwest. Breeds most commonly in moist coniferous forest with an understory of dense thickets in the Pacific northwest. In winter; some are found in dense low growth in woods; especially along streambanks or among tangles; brushpiles; and fallen logs. Populations on the Aleutian and Pribilof islands in Alaska may live in more open habitats.,Usually forages very low among dense vegetation; searching for insects among foliage; on twigs and trunks; and on ground.,5-6; sometimes 4-7. White; with reddish brown dots often concentrated toward larger end. Incubation is by female; about 14-17 days. Young: Probably both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 16-18 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including many beetles; caterpillars; true bugs; flies; and many others. Also eats many spiders; plus some millipedes and snails. Also sometimes eats berries. ,Male sings in spring to defend territory and attract a mate. In courtship; male perches near female; with wings half-opened and fluttering; tail moving from side to side; while he sings or calls. Nest site is in any kind of natural cavity close to the ground (lower than about 6'); including holes among upturned roots of downed trees; cavities in rotten stumps; old woodpecker holes; crevices among rocks. Within cavity; both sexes help build nest of grass; weeds; moss; rootlets; lined with animal hair and feathers. Male may also build several unlined "dummy" nests. 
Pacific-slope-Flycatcher,Empidonax difficilis,Tyrant Flycatchers,Moist woods; mixed forests; shady canyons. Breeds in wet forested regions. Often common in zones of coniferous forest; but there it seems to concentrate in deciduous growth; such as maples and alders; along streams. Also found in canyon groves of oak; sycamore; or willow. May tend to be in wetter forest than Cordilleran Flycatcher.,Forages by watching from a perch; at any level within shady parts of the forest; and then flying out to catch insects in the air. Also takes some food (such as caterpillars and spiders) from foliage or twigs while hovering.,3-4; rarely 5. Whitish; with brown blotches concentrated near larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 14-15 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 14-18 days.,Mostly insects. Differences in diet between this bird and Cordilleran Flycatcher poorly known. For the two species combined; diet is mostly insects; including small wasps; bees; flies; true bugs; caterpillars; moths; beetles; and others. Also eaten are spiders; and a few berries and seeds. ,In the Pacific northwest; this species and Hammond's Flycatcher may defend territories against each other. Nest site is sometimes in the fork of a small tree; but usually in other situations: in a cleft of a vertical streambank; on a stump; among the upturned roots of a fallen tree; under a small bridge; or on rafters in a shed. Natural sites are usually near (or on) the ground; but on artificial structures the nest may be more than 10' up. Nest (built by female) is cup of moss; grass; rootlets; strips of bark; lichens; and leaves; lined with finer material such as plant fibers; hair; feathers. 
Painted-Bunting,Passerina ciris,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Woodland edges; roadsides; brush; towns; gardens. Favors semi-open areas with dense low growth at all seasons. Breeds around thickets; hedgerows; woodland clearings and edges; and undergrowth of open woods. Winters in similar habitats in Florida; plus areas of scrub and second growth in the tropics.,Forages mostly on the ground. Also does some foraging up in shrubs and low trees. During migration; may forage in mixed flocks with Indigo Buntings.,3-4; sometimes 5. Whitish to bluish white or pale gray; with reddish brown spots often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; 11-12 days. Young: Nestlings are fed by the female. Young leave the nest about 12-14 days after hatching; and male may take over feeding them if female begins second nesting attempt. 2 broods per year; sometimes 3; perhaps rarely 4.,Mostly seeds and insects. Reported to feed mainly on seeds; primarily those of grasses and weeds; sometimes eats berries and fruits. Also eats many insects; including beetles; caterpillars; grasshoppers; flies; and others. Probably eats more insects in early summer; and feeds them to its young. ,To defend territory; male sings from a raised perch; often partly hidden among foliage near treetop. Males will also engage in serious physical fights; probably in disputes over territorial boundaries. One male may have more than one mate. Nest: Placed in dense bushes; vines; or low in trees; usually 3-9' above the ground; sometimes higher. Nest (built by female) is open cup woven of grass; weeds; leaves; lined with fine grass; rootlets; and animal hair. 
Painted-Redstart,Myioborus pictus,Wood Warblers,Oak canyons; pine-oak forests in mountains. Breeds in mixed oak and pine forests and in streamside woods of steep canyons above 5;000'. Prefers to nest under oaks; sycamores; ashes; maples; junipers; and pines. In winter in the tropics; found most often in dry open woodlands of oak and pine.,Forages actively at all levels; from ground to treetops. With wings and tail partly spread; hops quickly among branches; searching for insects. Often hovers while taking items from foliage; or darts out to catch insects in flight. May move up and down vertical trunks; clinging to bark. Sometimes joins mixed flocks with other birds; but often forages in pairs or alone.,Normally 3-4. Creamy white; with fine spots of brown. Incubation is by female only; 13-14 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Young leave the nest about 9-13 days after hatching. Often 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects. Diet not known in detail; but undoubtedly eats mostly insects; including caterpillars; flies; and small beetles. Also comes to hummingbird feeders to drink sugar-water. ,Males arrive on nesting territories 2-10 days before the females. During courtship; male chases female; and sometimes the pair sing duets together. Some males have more than one mate. Nest site selected by both members of pair. Placed on ground in a shady spot on steep slope; often on walls of narrow canyons; on low cliffs; beneath overhanging banks; or under a small boulder. Usually near a small stream. Nest is hidden in a shallow depression or crevice. Shallow; open cup; constructed by female; made of grass; pine needles; leaves; bark; thinly lined with fine grass and hair. 
Palm-Warbler,Setophaga palmarum,Wood Warblers,Wooded borders of muskeg (summer). In migration; low trees; bushes; ground. Breeds in sphagnum bogs with scattered cedar; tamarack; and spruce trees. The western race also breeds in dry pine barrens of boreal forests with ground cover of blueberry; bearberry; and sweet fern. In migration; frequents old hedgerows; edges of streams and ponds; overgrown fields; and open pastures.,In winter; does much foraging by walking and hopping on the ground. During the breeding season; gleans insects from foliage while perching or while hovering momentarily in black spruce; tamarack; and cedars. Also flies out to catch flying insects in mid-air. In fall; may join flocks with other warblers; chickadees; juncos; and sparrows.,Usually 4-5. Creamy white with brown marks. Incubated possibly by both parents; 12 days. Rarely a host to cowbird eggs; defends against parasitism by covering cowbird eggs over; building a new layer at the bottom of the nest. Young: Fed by both parents. Young leave the nest at about 12 days and are able to fly short distances within 1-2 days after fledging. Probably 2 broods per year.,Insects and berries. Feeds mostly on small beetles; mosquitoes; flies; caterpillars; aphids; grasshoppers; ants; bees; and spiders. Eats also a considerable amount of vegetable matter; including raspberries; bayberries; and seeds. ,Some males have more than one mate. An early nester; birds arrive on breeding grounds in early April and begin nests by early May. Nest: Placed on or near the ground in a stunted spruce tree; close to the trunk. Open cup nest is frequently concealed under a clump of grass; and on top of a hummock of sphagnum moss. Constructed by the female of fine; dry grass stems and bark shreds; lined with feathers. 
Parakeet-Auklet,Aethia psittacula,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; nests on sea cliffs. Found in cold ocean waters in summer; but may move into more temperate seas in winter. Apparently mostly very far from land in mid-ocean when not breeding. Nests on rocky islands around cliffs; pinnacles; talus slopes.,Forages by diving from surface and swimming underwater; or may forage while swimming at surface.,One. Whitish to pale blue. Incubation is by both sexes; about 36 days. Young: both parents feed young; bringing food to nest in throat pouch. Young leaves nest and goes to sea about 5 weeks after hatching.,Mainly jellyfish; also crustaceans. At least in summer; apparently specializes on jellyfish and other gelatinous creatures; odd bill shape may be adapted to handling such slippery prey. Also eats crustaceans; including euphausiid shrimp and amphipods; and some small fish. ,Breeds in isolated pairs or loose colonies; not so densely packed as Crested or Least auklets; but often near those species. Adults arrive in vicinity of colonies 4-6 weeks before egg-laying begins. Nest site is in deeply cracked or decomposed cliff; ridge; rocky outcrop; or in talus slope partly covered with vegetation. Thus often in places where rock is mixed with soil; not pure rock as in Crested Auklet. Nest is in deep crevice; no nest material added; egg laid on bare soil or rock. 
Parasitic-Jaeger,Stercorarius parasiticus,Skuas and Jaegers,Ocean; coastal bays; lakes (rarely); tundra (summer). Spends most of year at sea; concentrating over continental shelf within a few miles of land; rarely far out in mid-ocean. Breeds in open country of far north; mostly tundra; also rocky barrens and coastal marshes. Immatures and non-breeders may remain at sea all year.,At sea; does much of foraging by chasing other birds and forcing them to drop their catch; also dips down in flight to catch fish at surface. On breeding grounds; also hovers and swoops down to catch prey; and feeds while walking.,2; sometimes 1-3. Olive to brown; rarely blue; spotted with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 25-28 days. Young: Downy young may leave nest a few days after hatching; but remain in vicinity. Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young can fly at 25-30 days; but remain with parents for a few more weeks.,Includes fish; birds; rodents. Diet at sea and at coastal nesting areas is mostly fish stolen from other birds. On land; also eats many birds and their eggs; rodents; insects; berries. Less dependent on lemmings and other rodents than the other jaegers. ,Usually first breeds at age of 4-5 years; in one study in Europe; birds of pale morph tended to start nesting younger than dark birds. May nest in colonies or in isolated pairs. Early in breeding season; pairs or groups perform acrobatic display flights. Courtship involves upright posturing; calling; male feeds female. Nest site (selected by male) is on the ground in the open; sometimes on a slight rise. Nest (built mostly by female) is a shallow depression; usually with a sparse lining of plant material. 
Pechora-Pipit,Anthus gustavi,Wagtails and Pipits,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Pectoral-Sandpiper,Calidris melanotos,Sandpipers,In migration; prairie pools; muddy shores; fresh and tidal marshes; in summer; tundra. Migrants favor grassy places rather than open mudflats. Often seen along grassy edges of shores; at edges of tidal marsh; in flooded fields or wet meadows. Sometimes on dry prairie or even plowed fields. On breeding grounds; favors wet grassy areas of tundra.,Forages by picking up items from surface of ground; also by probing in mud or shallow water.,4. Whitish to olive-buff; blotched with dark brown. Incubation is by female only; 21-23 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Female tends young; but young feed themselves. Age at first flight about 21 days.,Mostly insects. Diet not well known. On breeding grounds; feeds mostly on insects; especially flies and their larvae; also beetles and others. Also eats amphipods; spiders; some seeds. Diet in migration may include small crabs and other crustaceans; plus other aquatic invertebrates; but insects may still be main food. ,In flight display; male puffs out chest sac so that chest looks like a feathered balloon. As the male flies low over a female on the ground; he gives low-pitched throbbing hooting noise; after passing female he circles; alternating flutters and glides; back to his starting point. On ground; male approaches female with tail raised; wings drooping; chest puffed out. One male may mate with several females; and he takes no part in caring for the eggs or young. Nest site is on ground in grassy tundra; often in dry upland site but sometimes near water; usually well hidden in grass. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression with cup-shaped lining of grass and leaves. 
Pelagic-Cormorant,Phalacrocorax pelagicus,Cormorants,Coast; bays; sounds. On ocean usually rather close to shore; sometimes well out to sea. Favors rocky bays; areas of deep water near base of cliffs. Nests on islands or coasts on narrow ledges; steep slopes; other inaccessible locations.,Forages by diving from surface and swimming underwater; propelled mainly by feet; though possibly sometimes may use wings as well. Forages singly; although may be attracted to concentrations of other feeding birds. Known to dive to at least 120' below surface; takes much of food from near bottom in rocky areas.,3-5; sometimes 1-7. Bluish white; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; 26-37 days; typically about 30. Young:  Probably both parents feed nestlings. Young may be capable of short flights at 35-40 days; leave nest at about 45-55 days (much variation). Parents may tend and feed young for a few weeks after they leave nest.,Fish; crustaceans. Eats mainly small fish; including sculpin; herrings; greenlings; sand lance; also many crabs; shrimps. Also eats marine worms; amphipods; algae. ,Nests in colonies. Male displays at nest site with bill pointed up; tail down; quickly raising and lowering tips of folded wings so that white flank patches appear to flash rapidly. Nest:  Site is on cliffs with near-vertical slopes; narrow ledges. Parents not effective at defending eggs or young; rely on inaccessible location for protection. Nest is of seaweed; grass; moss; sometimes sticks. Both sexes help build nest; may use same nest each year; adding to it annually. 
Peregrine-Falcon,Falco peregrinus,Falcons,Open country; cliffs (mountains to coast); sometimes cities. Over its wide range; found in wide variety of open habitats; from tundra to desert mountains. Often near water; especially along coast; and migrants may fly far out to sea. Limited by availability of nest sites and prey; thus; it often moves into cities; nesting on building ledges and feeding on pigeons.,Often hunts by flying very high; then stooping in spectacular dive to strike prey out of the air. Large prey may be knocked out of the air; fed upon on the ground where it falls. Also pursues prey in level flight; after having spotted it from a perch or while flying. May fly very low over ground or sea; taking prey by surprise.,3-4; sometimes 2-5; rarely 6. Whitish to pale reddish-brown; heavily marked with warm brown. Incubation is mostly by female; 32-35 days. Male brings food for female during incubation. Young: Female stays with young at first; while male brings food for her and for young; later; female hunts also. Age of young at first flight 39-49 days.,Mostly birds. Feeds on a wide variety of birds. Pigeons are often favored prey around cities; and ducks and shorebirds often taken along coast; known to take prey as large as loons; geese; large gulls; and as small as songbirds. Also eats a few small mammals; seldom insects; rarely carrion. ,May mate for life. Territorial and courtship displays include high circling flight by male; spectacular dives and chases by both sexes. Male feeds female. Breeding Peregrines defend the immediate area of the nest from intruders; but hunt over a much larger area. Nest site is usually on cliff ledge; sometimes in hollow of broken-off tree snag or in old stick nest of other large bird in tree. In some areas; may nest on ground on hilltop. Also uses ledges of buildings; bridges; other structures. Some sites may be used for many years. No nest built; eggs laid in simple scrape. 
Phainopepla,Phainopepla nitens,Silky-flycatchers,Desert scrub; mesquites; oak foothills; mistletoe clumps. Occurs in many lowland and foothills habitats; moving around with availability of berries. Often in Sonoran desert areas and mesquite groves at various times of year; at some seasons; moves into chaparral; streamside trees; and oak woodlands.,Feeds on berries mostly while perched; also hovers briefly to pluck berries or insects. Catches insects in mid-air by flying out from a perch and pursuing them in quick fluttery flight.,2-3; rarely 4. Grayish; heavily dotted with lavender and black. Incubation is by both parents; 14-16 days. Male noted to do most of incubation during daylight hours. Young: Fed by both parents; receiving mostly crushed insects at first; then also berries. Young leave the nest about 19-20 days after hatching.,Mostly berries and insects. Mistletoe berries are mainstays of diet when available. Also feeds heavily on berries of elder; buckthorn; and sometimes juniper; in settled areas; eats many berries of pepper trees. Also eats many insects; especially in warmer weather; including beetles; flies; true bugs; and caterpillars. ,Male displays over nesting territory by flying in high circles and zigzags. In courtship; male may chase female in flight; while perched; male may feed female. Nest: Often placed in center of clump of mistletoe; where it is very difficult to see; sometimes in fork of branch. Nest height varies with habitat; typically low (4-12' above ground) in desert mesquites; higher (up to 50') in streamside oaks or sycamores. Nest; built primarily by male; is a rather small shallow cup of twigs; weeds; leaves; plant fibers; bound together with spiderwebs and lined with animal hair or plant down. 
Philadelphia-Vireo,Vireo philadelphicus,Vireos,Second growth; poplars; willows; alders. Breeds in deciduous and mixed woodlands; especially near their edges; or in the young growth of overgrown pastures. Also nests in willows and alders along streams; lakes; and ponds. In winter in the tropics; often in fairly dry forest in lowlands and foothills.,Forages mostly in deciduous trees and shrubs; moving about actively as it searches for insects. Often hovers to take items from foliage; or hangs upside down at the tips of twigs to take insects from underside. Sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air.,4; sometimes 3-5. White with brown or black spots near large end. Incubation is by both parents; about 14 days. Young: Nestlings are fed by both parents. The young leave the nest about 12-14 days after hatching.,Mostly insects; some berries. Feeds mostly on insects; including caterpillars; moths; beetles; wasps; bees; ants; ichneumons; true bugs; and many others; also some spiders. Eats many berries in late summer and fall; including those of bayberry and dogwood. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. In courtship display; male faces female and sways from side to side; fluffing plumage and spreading tail; both members of pair vibrate wings rapidly. Nest site is 10-90' above the ground in deciduous tree such as aspen; willow; alder; or maple. Nest is a compact; basket-like cup; its rim woven onto a horizontal forked twig. Nest (built by both sexes) made of grass; strips of birch bark; lichen; weeds; spiderwebs; and cocoons; lined with pine needles; grass; and feathers. 
Pied-billed-Grebe,Podilymbus podiceps,Grebes,Ponds; lakes; marshes; in winter; also salt bays. In breeding season; chooses sites with heavy marsh vegetation but with some open water also. In migration and winter; still most likely on marshy freshwater ponds; but also on more open waters; including estuaries and coastal bays.,Forages by diving from surface and swimming underwater; propelled mainly by feet.,4-7; rarely 2-10. Pale bluish white; becoming stained brownish. Incubation by both sexes (female does more); about 23 days. Eggs are covered with nest material when incubating bird departs. Young:  Can swim soon after hatching. Young are fed by both parents; often ride on parents' backs when small; adults may swim underwater with young on back. Age at first flight not well known. One or 2 broods per year; possibly more in south.,Insects; fish; other aquatic life. Diet highly variable with location and season; probably eats most small aquatic creatures in its habitat. Major food items include aquatic insects; crustaceans; small fish; leeches; also eats mollusks; frogs; tadpoles; salamanders; spiders; small amounts of aquatic plants. Like other grebes; swallows many feathers; and feeds feathers to its young. ,Where climate allows; may have a long breeding season; from early spring to mid-autumn. Courtship displays less ritualized than in most grebes; involving much calling; sometimes in duet. Nest:  Site is in shallow water in marsh; next to opening so that birds can approach nest underwater. Nest (built by both sexes) a dense mass of plant material; floating or built up from bottom; anchored to standing vegetation. 
Pigeon-Guillemot,Cepphus columba,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Rocky coasts; inshore waters. Breeds on rocky islands and on mainland cliffs inaccessible to predators. At sea usually close to rocky shorelines; less often far out over continental shelf. In Bering Sea may be far from land around openings and edges of pack ice.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled mainly by wings. Uses feet mostly for steering but also; unlike most auks; for some propulsion underwater. Mostly forages by searching sea bottom; can dive as much as 150' below surface but most feeding is probably within 60' of surface.,1-2. Creamy to pale blue-green; with gray and brown blotches concentrated near large end. Incubation is by both sexes; 26-32 days. Young: Both parents feed young; bringing them small fish at all hours of day; especially in early morning. Young leave nest 29-54 days after hatching; usually at night; scrambling or fluttering down to water. Able to swim and dive immediately; but not capable of strong flight for another 2-3 weeks.,fish and other marine life. Diet varies with season and location. Eats mostly small fish; also shrimps; crabs; polychaete worms; mollusks; small octopus. ,First breeds at age 3-5 years. Courtship displays by members of pair include mutual circling and bill-touching. Rapid zigzag chases on water near colony may also be involved in courtship. Nest site; probably chosen by male; is in crevice or cave; among boulders; in abandoned burrow; under driftwood or debris. May also excavate own nest burrow. Same site usually re-used for several years. Nest is shallow scrape in pile of dirt; pebbles; shells. 
Pileated-Woodpecker,Dryocopus pileatus,Woodpeckers,Conifer; mixed; and hardwood forests; woodlots. Favors mature deciduous or mixed deciduous-coniferous forest; also coniferous forest. Wide variety of specific forest types from southern swamps to old-growth Douglas-fir forest of northwest. Also in second-growth and fragmented woodlots; as long as some large trees are present.,Forages mainly by probing; prying; and excavating in dead wood in search of insects. May gouge deep holes in rotten wood to get at ant nests; sometimes tearing apart stumps and big sections of fallen logs. May clamber about acrobatically in small branches to get at berries.,3-5. White. Incubation is by both sexes (male incubating at night and part of day); about 18 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; by regurgitation. Young leave nest 26-28 days after hatching; may remain with parents 2-3 months.,Mostly ants and other insects; also fruits; nuts. Carpenter ants may be up to 60% of diet; also eats other ants (rarely digging into anthills on ground); termites; larvae of wood-boring beetles; other insects. About one-quarter of the diet may be wild fruits; berries; and nuts. ,Territory is defended with loud drumming and ringing calls. Courtship displays include spreading wings (showing off white wing patch); raising crest; swinging head back and forth; gliding display flight. At prospective nest site; both sexes may tap or drum on wood. Nest site is a cavity in a dead tree or in dead branch of a live tree; sometimes in utility pole; usually 15-80' above ground. Generally makes a new cavity each year; with both sexes helping to excavate. 
Pine-Grosbeak,Pinicola enucleator,Finches,Conifers; in winter; other trees. Breeds in open coniferous forest; especially of spruce and fir; despite the name; not usually in pines in summer. In winter often found in deciduous trees (especially fruiting trees such as mountain-ash or crabapple); also in groves of pines and other conifers.,Forages mostly up in trees and shrubs. Tends to be very methodical in feeding; moving about slowly in trees while feeding on buds; seeds; and fruits. Except during the nesting season; often forages in small flocks.,2-5; usually 4. Bluish green; spotted with brown; purple; and black. Incubation is by female only; about 13-14 days. Male often feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; during breeding season; both sexes develop throat pouches that allow them to carry more food at once. Young leave the nest about 2-3 weeks after hatching. 1 brood per year.,Seeds; buds; berries; insects. Feeds mostly on vegetable matter; especially in winter. Major items include the seeds of conifers and other trees; buds of many kinds of trees (such as maples); berries; wild fruits (including crabapples); sometimes seeds of weeds and grasses. Also eats some insects; mainly in summer. Will come to feeders for sunflower seeds and other items. ,Male sings a mellow continuous warble to defend nesting territory. In courtship; male feeds female. Nest: Placed on horizontal branch or in fork of conifer such as spruce or fir; usually 5-15' above ground; sometimes as low as 2' in deciduous shrub or up to 25' high in tree. Nest is a bulky open cup made of twigs; weeds; rootlets; lined with fine grass; rootlets; lichens; moss. 
Pine-Siskin,Spinus pinus,Finches,Conifers; mixed woods; alders; weedy areas. Breeds mostly in coniferous and mixed woods; often around edges or clearings; sometimes in deciduous woods; isolated conifer groves. In migration and winter occurs in many kinds of semi-open areas; woodland edges; weedy fields.,Forages actively in trees; shrubs; and weeds; sometimes hanging upside down to reach seeds. Usually forages in flocks (even during nesting season); often associated with goldfinches in winter.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale greenish blue; with brown and black dots often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 13 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: After eggs hatch; female may spend most of time brooding young at first; while male brings food; later; both feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 14-15 days after hatching.,Mostly seeds and other vegetable matter; some insects. Feeds on seeds of alder; birch; spruce; and many other trees; also those of weeds and grasses; eats buds; flower parts; nectar; young shoots. Also feeds on insects; including caterpillars and aphids. May be attracted to salt. ,Breeding range often changes from year to year. May nest in loose colonies or in isolated pairs. Courtship and formation of pairs may begin in winter flocks; male displays by flying in circle above female; with wings and tail spread widely; while singing. Male often feeds female during courtship. Nest site is well hidden in tree (usually in conifer); on horizontal branch well out from trunk. Typically 10-40' above ground; can be lower or higher. Nest (built by female) is a rather large but shallow open cup of twigs; grass; strips of bark; rootlets; lined with moss; animal hair; feathers. 
Pine-Warbler,Setophaga pinus,Wood Warblers,Chiefly open pine woods; pine barrens. Usually breeds in open pine woods; especially southern longleaf pine forest; sandy barrens of pitch pine with scrub oak undergrowth; jack-pine barrens; and similar habitats. Also sometimes in cedar or cypress. In winter; occurs in a wider variety of habitats including heavily wooded bottomlands; orchards; thickets; woodland edges.,Does much climbing on tree trunks and will walk on ground to forage for dormant insects or seeds. Feeds deliberately; gleaning insects from foliage; sometimes hanging from needle clusters like a titmouse. Probes in pine cones for insects. In winter in the south; may forage in flocks with Eastern Bluebirds.,3-5; usually 4. Off-white; with brown specks toward the large end. Incubation is by both parents; probably about 10 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave the nest at 10 days of age. Pairs may raise 2-3 broods annually.,Insects; seeds; berries. Largely feeds on insects and spiders; diet includes grasshoppers; caterpillars; moths; beetles; ants; bugs; others. When few insects available; often eats seeds of pine; grass; and weeds; also some berries. Will visit bird feeders for suet and other items. ,Males begin singing on breeding territories in early February in the southern part of their range; in late March or early April in the north. Nest sites located toward the ends of limbs of pines or occasionally other trees; usually 30-50' above the ground; can be 8-135' up. Concealed from below by foliage. Nest (built by female) is deep; open cup of weed stalks; grass stems; strips of bark; pine needles; twigs; spiderweb; lined with feathers. 
Pink-footed-Goose,Anser brachyrhynchus,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Pink-footed-Shearwater,Ardenna creatopus,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Mainly found well offshore over relatively shallow waters of continental shelf. Rarely seen from shore; and rarely over deep mid-ocean waters. Nests on islands with soil suitable for nesting burrows.,Forages mostly by plunging into water from flight or diving from surface; and swimming short distance underwater with wings spread; also seizes items while swimming on surface. May follow boats for scraps or offal.,One. White. Both sexes probably incubate; incubation period not known. Young:  Probably fed by both parents during nocturnal visits; age at first flight not known. Young depart nesting islands in April and May.,Includes fish and squid. Diet not well known; in addition to fish and squid; probably eats various crustaceans. ,Breeding behavior not well known. Nests in colonies on islands far off coast of Chile. Active at colonies mostly at dusk and at night. Adults gather near colonies in September; by October; some two months before eggs are laid; pairs may be resting together in burrows. Mated pairs may call softly in duet; preen each other's head and neck. Nest:  Site is in burrow underground; often more than four feet long. Nest chamber may have sparse lining. Most eggs probably laid in early December. 
Pinyon-Jay,Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Pinyon pines; junipers; ranges into sagebrush. Under normal conditions; seldom found far from pinyon pines in pinyon-juniper woods. At times; perhaps when the pinyon cone crop fails; flocks are seen elsewhere in streamside groves; oak woods; or other habitats.,Does much foraging on ground; also feeds in trees; and occasionally flies out to catch insects in the air. Almost always forages in flocks. Stores many pine seeds in late summer and fall; burying caches in ground; and is able to find them and feed on them later.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Very pale blue-green to grayish; finely dotted with brown. Incubation is by female; about 16-17 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest about 3 weeks after hatching.,Omnivorous; but especially pinyon pine seeds. Feeds heavily on seeds of pinyon pine; also eats seeds of other pines and many other plants; berries; small fruits; nuts; waste grain. Especially in summer; eats many insects; including beetles; caterpillars; and grasshoppers; also sometimes eggs and young of smaller birds. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Nests in colonies; close together but usually no more than 1-3 nests in any one tree. Breeds mostly in late winter; the adults feeding largely on stored seeds; may nest again in late summer if pinyon pines produce an exceptional seed crop. In courtship; several males may pursue one female in flight. Nest site is usually 3-20' above the ground in juniper; oak; or pinyon; sometimes much higher in other kind of pine. Nest (built by both sexes) has foundation of twigs; inner cup made of shredded bark; grass; rootlets; pine needles; animal hair. Often steals material from unattended nests of neighbors. 
Piping-Plover,Charadrius melodus,Plovers,Sandy beaches; tidal flats. Nests in open sandy situations near water; in a variety of settings: beaches along Atlantic Coast and Great Lakes; sandbars along major rivers on northern Great Plains; gravel or sand flats next to alkali lakes. Winters along coast; on tidal flats and beaches.,Typically they run a few steps and then pause; then run again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible. Will sometimes hold one foot forward and shuffle it rapidly over the surface of sand or mud; as if to startle small creatures into moving.,4; sometimes 2-3; rarely 5. Pale buff; blotched with black and dark brown. Incubation is by both sexes; averages 26-28 days. Young: Downy young may leave nest a few hours after hatching. Young feed themselves. Both parents brood young during cool weather at first; but female often deserts them within a few days; leaving male to care for young. Development of young not well known; able to fly at 21-35 days.,Includes insects; marine worms; crustaceans. Diet not well known. On coast; feeds on marine worms; small crustaceans; insects; other marine invertebrates. Inland; feeds mostly on insects; including small beetles; water boatmen; shore flies; midges; and many others. ,Males perform display flights over breeding territory; with slow wingbeats and piping callnote. On the ground; male approaches female; stands upright with neck stretched; and rapidly stamps feet with odd high-stepping gait. Nest site is on open ground some distance away from water; often with large rock or clump of grass nearby; but no direct shelter or shade. May nest very close to breeding colonies of terns. Nest is shallow scrape in sand; sometimes lined with tiny shells and pebbles. 
Piratic-Flycatcher,Legatus leucophaius,Tyrant Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Plain-Chachalaca,Ortalis vetula,Chachalacas,Subtropical woods; river groves; dense brush. In south Texas usually found near water; as around ponds; resacas; riverbanks. Generally in native woodlands of ebony; hackberry; huisache; and mesquite; but also found around edges of overgrown orchards and well-wooded suburbs of Rio Grande Valley towns.,Forages on ground or in shrubs and trees; often climbing about precariously in thin branches.,2-3; sometimes 4. Creamy white. Incubation is by female only; about 25 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Both parents care for young; feeding them by regurgitation at first. Young can flutter short distances within a few days after hatching; can fly up into brush at 2-3 weeks; but not full-grown until sometime later.,Mostly berries; leaves; buds; seeds. Diet in south Texas is mostly vegetarian; eating various parts of a wide variety of plants; includes berries of coyotillo; pigeonberry; and hackberry; and others; plus seeds; leaves; buds; and flowers. Also eats a few insects and snails. Where accustomed to humans in certain parks; will come to eat birdseed; popcorn; bread; and other junk food. ,In southern Texas; usually nests in woods very close to water. Nest site is on limb or in fork of branches; sometimes in vines or in broken-off stub; in tree within dense cover. Usually 4-15' above ground; sometimes up to 35'. Nest is a flat platform of sticks; twigs; weeds; leaves; Spanish moss; with a depression in the center; an old nest of some other bird may be used as the foundation. 
Plain-capped-Starthroat,Heliomaster constantii,Hummingbirds,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Plumbeous-Vireo,Vireo plumbeus,Vireos,Coniferous and mixed conifer-deciduous woods. Breeds in rather open woods; mainly in habitats dominated by ponderosa pine; but also where ponderosa is mixed with junipers or pinyon pines. May be especially common in areas with understory of oak. Migrants occur in any kind of woodland.,Forages rather deliberately in upper part of trees; searching for insects along branches and twigs as well as among leaves. Sometimes searches for items on bark of major limbs.,3-5; usually 4. Whitish; lightly spotted with brown and black. Incubation is by both parents; about 12-14 days. In some areas; nests are often parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 2 weeks after hatching.,Mostly insects. In summer feeds almost entirely on insects; including caterpillars; true bugs; beetles; wasps; bees; and many others; also spiders. Also eats some berries and small fruits; especially in winter. ,Male sings frequently throughout the day to defend nesting territory. In courtship display; male may fluff up plumage and sway his body from side to side while singing. Nest: Placed in horizontal fork of branch in tree; often quite low (6-12' above the ground); can be much higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is a rather bulky open cup; suspended by its rim. Nest is made of grass; strips of bark; weeds; plant fibers; rootlets; lined with plant down and rootlets. Outside of nest may be decorated with moss or lichens. 
Pomarine-Jaeger,Stercorarius pomarinus,Skuas and Jaegers,Open sea; coasts (offshore); tundra (summer). Spends most of year at sea; often over continental shelf; but usually stays farther from land than Parasitic Jaeger and may occur far out in mid-ocean. Concentrates over upwellings and boundaries of currents. In summer on tundra; generally low-lying areas near coast.,Forages at sea by dipping to surface in flight to catch fish; by catching small birds in flight; also by harassing other birds and forcing them to drop their food. Forages over land mostly by hovering and dropping on prey.,2; rarely 1-3. Olive to brown; blotched with dark brown. Incubation is by both parents; 25-27 days. Young: May leave nest a few days after hatching; but remain in general area; are fed by both parents. Age at first flight about 31-27 days; dependent on parents at least 2 more weeks.,Includes fish; rodents; birds. Diet varies with location. At sea; usually eats fish; also smaller birds and some carrion or refuse. Breeding birds feed heavily on lemmings and other rodents; non-breeding birds in summer around tundra have more varied diet; including birds; eggs; fish; carrion; insects. ,At least in some regions; much more likely to nest in years when rodent populations are high. Birds younger than 4-5 years old attempt nesting only in such good seasons. Defends nesting territory against other species of jaegers. In courtship; members of pair face each other; vibrating wings and calling. Male may feed female. Nest site is on open ground; sometimes on slightly raised ridge or hummock. Nest (built by both sexes) a shallow depression; often lined with bits of plant material. 
Prairie-Falcon,Falco mexicanus,Falcons,Open hills; plains; prairies; deserts. Typically found in fairly dry open country; including grassland and desert. Also in open country above treeline in high mountains. In winter; often found in farmland and around lakes and reservoirs; and may regularly winter in some western cities. Avoids forested country; and usually scarce on the immediate coast.,Uses a wide variety of hunting techniques. Often hunts by flying fast and low over ground; taking prey by surprise. Also will dive steeply from the air; or pursue birds in flight.,Usually 3-5; sometimes 2-6. Whitish; spotted with brown. Incubation is mostly by female; about 31 days. Male brings food to incubating female; and he may sit on eggs temporarily while she is eating. Young: Female remains with young for about the first 4 weeks; male brings food; and female feeds it to young. After 4 weeks; female may do some hunting. Young leave the nest at about 5-6 weeks after hatching.,Mostly small birds and mammals. Often will focus on one abundant and easily caught prey species at a time. May feed heavily on ground squirrels in early summer; shifting to young songbirds when many are fledging; in winter; may feed on common flocking birds like Horned Lark. Many other species eaten; up to size of grouse and jackrabbits; also lizards; insects. ,Courtship involves much flying about and calling near potential nesting ledges. Male performs aerial acrobatics; struts back and forth at nest site. Nest site is typically on a ledge of a cliff; in a recessed site; protected by an overhang of rock. Sometimes nests on dirt bank; or uses an abandoned nest of raven or hawk on ledge; rarely uses nest in tree. No nest built; only a simple scrape in gravel or dirt on ledge. 
Prairie-Warbler,Setophaga discolor,Wood Warblers,Brushy slashings; bushy pastures; low pines. Breeds in dry old clearings; edges of forest; and sandy pine barrens with undergrowth of scrub oaks; especially on ends of slopes and ridges. Likes thick second-growth of hickory; dogwood; hazel; or laurel with blackberry vines. In Florida; breeds in mangrove swamps. Found in flat; grassy lands with scattered trees and bushes in the South in the winter.,Forages mainly by taking insects while perched or hopping on branches or twigs. Also catches flying insects in mid-air; and takes insects from undersides of leaves (and spiders from their webs) while hovering. Will also feed occasionally by hanging upside down from tips of branches or by flying down to pick up insects from ground.,4; sometimes 3-5. Off-white; with brown spots concentrated at larger end. Incubated by female for usually 12 (11-14) days. Commonly parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Fed by both parents; leave the nest at 8-11 days. Fledglings may be divided by parents; each adult caring for part of brood for 40-50 days until young are independent. Often 2 broods per season.,Mostly insects. Feeds on many insects including caterpillars; moths; tree crickets; lacewings; true bugs; beetles; ants; flies; also spiders and millipedes. Also eats a few berries; and occasionally sap from holes drilled in trees by sapsuckers. Nestlings are fed mostly caterpillars. ,Some males have more than one mate. Often breeds in loose colonies. Males return year after year to the same breeding territory; but females often do not. Males utter a loud; harsh rattle during fights with other males. During courtship; male performs slow butterfly-like display flights; also chases female. Nest: Placed in site selected by female. Usually in a tree (such as pine; cedar; sweet-gum; oak); 1-45' above the ground. In coastal Florida; usually in mangroves. Nest (built by female) an open cup; made of densely felted plant materials such as plant down; and lined with animal hair. 
Prothonotary-Warbler,Protonotaria citrea,Wood Warblers,Wooded swamps. Breeds in flooded river bottom hardwoods including black willow; ash; buttonbush; sweetgum; red maple; hackberry; river birch; and elm; or wetlands with bay trees surrounded by cypress swamp. Also nests near borders of lakes; rivers and ponds; normally only in areas with slow moving or standing water. Winters in the tropics in lowland woods and mangrove swamps.,Feeds by gleaning insects among foliage; normally low down among thickets; and usually above water. Sometimes hops about on floating drift wood and mossy logs; peeping into crevices. May occasionally forage by winding its way up the trunks of trees like a nuthatch.,4-6; sometimes 3-8. Creamy or pink; with spots of brown. Incubation is by female; 12-14 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave nest 10-11 days after hatching. Supposedly can swim at fledging. 2 broods per year.,Insects and snails. Feeds on adult insects and larvae (especially aquatic insects); ants; caterpillars; mayflies; beetles; and other insects; also snails and other small mollusks; spiders; and some seeds. ,Males arrive on nesting grounds in early April; about a week before females. Males establish territories by singing; vigorous displays; chases; and fighting. Males place small amounts of moss into the nest cavity; building dummy nests; but only female builds real nest. Male displays intensively to the female during courtship by fluffing plumage; and spreading wings and tail. Nest site usually 5-10' up (sometimes 3-30' up); above standing water in hole in tree or stump. Cavities are often old Downy Woodpecker nests. Sometimes excavates its own hole in very rotten stumps; and will use birdhouses. Female fills nest cavity nearly to the entrance hole with moss; dry leaves; twigs and bark; then lines it with rootlets and bark strips. 
Purple-Finch,Haemorhous purpureus,Finches,Woods; groves; suburbs. Breeds mostly in coniferous and mixed woods; both in forest interior and along edges. In Pacific states; also breeds in oak woodland and streamside trees. In migration and winter; found in a wide variety of wooded and semi-open areas; including forest; suburbs; swamps; and overgrown fields.,Forages for seeds and insects up in trees and shrubs; also in low weeds and sometimes on the ground. When not nesting; may forage in small flocks. Comes to bird feeders.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Pale greenish blue; marked with black and brown. Incubation is by female; about 13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 2 weeks after hatching. 1 brood per year; possibly 2 in Pacific Coast region.,Seeds; buds; berries; insects. Feeds mainly on seeds in winter; including seeds of trees such as ash and elm; as well as weed and grass seeds. Also eats buds of many trees; and many berries and small fruits. Eats some insects such as caterpillars and beetles; mainly in summer. Young may be fed mostly on seeds. ,In courtship; male hops near female with his wings drooping; tail raised; chest puffed out; then vibrates wings until he rises a short distance in the air. May hold bits of nest material in bill and give soft song during this performance. Nest: Placed on horizontal branch or fork of tree (usually conifer in East; deciduous trees often used in far West); often well out from trunk. Typically about 15-20' above ground but may be lower or up to 50' high. Nest (probably built mostly by female) is compact open cup of twigs; weeds; rootlets; strips of bark; lined with fine grass; moss; animal hair. 
Purple-Gallinule,Porphyrio martinicus,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Fresh swamps; marshes; ponds. In North America usually in extensive wetlands with still or slow-moving shallow water; lots of dense marsh cover and floating vegetation. In tropics may be found also on smaller ponds; ditches. During migration; individuals may stop over in odd habitats; even in cities.,Forages while walking on land; while climbing through marsh vegetation or waterside shrubs or trees; or while swimming.,6-8; sometimes 5-10. Buff with brown spots. Incubation is by both sexes; 22-25 days. Young: May leave nest shortly after hatching; move to 2nd nest.  In feeding young; parents are often assisted by other birds (as many as 8); these "helpers" evidently all are previous offspring of breeding pair; and juveniles less than 10 weeks old may help feed newly hatched chicks. Young are capable of flight at roughly 9 weeks.,Omnivorous. Eats a wide variety of plant and animal matter; including seeds; fruits; and leaves of aquatic and terrestrial plants; also insects; frogs; snails; spiders; worms; fish. At times; eats the eggs and young of other birds. ,Breeding behavior has been studied mostly in Costa Rica. May breed at any season in tropics; only in spring and summer in North America. Nest site is in dense marsh growth; over water that is often several feet deep. Nest (built by both sexes) is platform of cattails; grasses; sedges; firmly anchored to standing marsh vegetation; at water level or 1-3' above it. Often build extra nests. 
Purple-Martin,Progne subis,Swallows,Towns; farms; semi-open country near water; in west; also mountain forest; saguaro desert. In the east; breeds in any kind of semi-open area where nest sites are provided; especially near a pond or river. More local in the west; with isolated colonies breeding around woodland edges; clearings in mountain forest; and lowland desert with giant saguaro cactus.,Forages almost entirely in the air. May forage very low over water; or quite high at times. Occasionally walks about on ground to pick up insects; perhaps mostly in harsh weather.,4-5; sometimes 3-8. White. Incubation is by female; 15-18 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 26-31 days after hatching.,Insects. Feeds on a wide variety of flying insects; including many wasps and winged ants; and some bees; also many true bugs; flies (including house flies and crane flies); beetles; moths; and butterflies. Dragonflies may be an important part of diet. Also eats some spiders. The old claim of martins eating "2;000 mosquitoes a day" apparently has no basis in fact. ,Males return to nesting areas first in spring; establish nesting territories. Usually nests in colonies; especially in east; where almost all are in multiple-roomed nest boxes put up for them. Western martins may nest in looser colonies or as isolated pairs. Male will sometimes have more than one mate. Nest: Natural sites are in cavities; mostly old woodpecker holes; in trees (or in giant cactus in southwest). In the east; most martins now use nest boxes. Sometimes nests in holes in buildings or cliffs. Nest (built by both sexes) is cup of leaves; grass; twigs; debris; and usually mud. Nest may have raised dirt rim in front to help keep eggs from rolling out. 
Purple-Sandpiper,Calidris maritima,Sandpipers,Wave-washed rocks; jetties. In winter almost always on rocky shores or rock jetties and breakwaters; foraging in zone below high-tide mark. Sometimes in areas of seaweed washed up on beaches. In summer on barren northern tundra; especially in rocky areas or ridges.,Clambers over rocks; seaweed; beaches; or tundra; looking for prey. Occasionally probes in mud; but usually finds food visually.,4; sometimes 3. Olive to buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is by both sexes (but male often does more); 21-22 days. Young: May leave nest within a few hours after hatching. Young are cared for mostly or entirely by male; from the beginning; young find their own food. Age at first flight not well known; probably about 3 weeks.,Mostly insects and mollusks. On breeding grounds eats mostly insects; also some crustaceans; spiders; worms. Unlike most sandpipers; also eats some plant material; including berries; buds; seeds; leaves; and moss. On migration and winter; diet is mostly small mollusks; including mussels and snails; also some crustaceans and insects. ,In territorial display; male flies in wide circles with wings fluttered above horizontal. Displays to intruders on ground by raising one wing high above back. Male may pursue female on ground or in the air. Nest site is on ground on open tundra; either in high rocky area or lower wet site; often among lichen or moss. Nest is shallow depression; with or without lining of grass; leaves. Male makes up to 5 nest scrapes; female chooses one. 
Pygmy-Nuthatch,Sitta pygmaea,Nuthatches,Yellow pines; other pines; Douglas fir. Yellow pine (the commercial name for ponderosa and Jeffrey pines) is main habitat element throughout mountains of west; also occurs in Monterey pine on California coast. In some places extends into pinyon-juniper woodland and redwood canyons. On rare visits to lowlands; likely to be in planted conifers.,Forages mainly on outermost and highest branches of pines; including cones and needle clusters; also on main branches and trunks. Sometimes sallies out to catch flying insects in the air. Often stores seeds in holes or crevices in bark.,Usually 6-8; rarely 4-9. White; lightly dotted with reddish-brown. Female incubates (15-16 days); is fed on nest by male and sometimes by additional helpers. Young: Are fed by both parents and often by helpers. Young leave the nest at about 20-22 days. 1 brood per year; occasionally 2.,Mostly insects and seeds. Diet in summer is primarily insects; especially beetles; wasps; caterpillars; and true bugs; also many others. In winter; also eats many seeds; especially pine seeds. Nestlings are fed mostly insects. ,Nesting pairs often joined by 1-3 additional birds; usually their previous offspring; which help to defend the territory and raise the young; these helpers may roost in nest hole with the pair before the eggs hatch. Pairs with helpers tend to fledge more young than pairs without. Nest: Both sexes help excavate nest cavity in dead limb or snag; 8-60' above ground; usually higher than 20'. May tolerate some hole-nesting birds quite nearby (bluebirds; swallows) but not chickadees or other nuthatches. Nest in cavity is made of bark fibers; plant down; feathers. Pair usually roosts at night in nest cavity prior to egg-laying. 
Pyrrhuloxia,Cardinalis sinuatus,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Mesquites; thorn scrub; deserts. Present at all seasons in dense brush in very dry country; including mesquite groves; desert washes; lower stretches of arid canyons; dry plains with mesquite and acacia scrub; streamside brush in desert regions. In winter; also wanders into open woods; forest edges; hedgerows in farm country.,Forages mostly while hopping on ground; also does some foraging up in shrubs and low trees. Except when nesting; often forages in small flocks.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale grayish white to greenish white; spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by female only; about 14 days. Male often feeds female on nest during incubation period. Young: Both parents bring food for the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10 days after hatching.,Mostly insects; seeds; berries. Diet is varied. Feeds on many insects; including beetles; caterpillars; grasshoppers; and many others; also other arthropods. Eats many seeds; including those of weeds and grasses; and also frequently eats mesquite seeds. Feeds on berries and wild fruits; including cactus fruits. Will come to feeders for sunflower seeds. ,Male sings in spring to defend territory; at beginning of breeding season; both male and female may actively chase intruders of their own species. In courtship; male often feeds female. Nest: Placed 4-15' above the ground; usually in a thorny shrub or low tree; sometimes within a clump of mistletoe. Nest (built mostly or entirely by female) is an open cup made of thorny twigs; weeds; grass; strips of bark; lined with rootlets; plant fibers; fine grass. 
Razorbill,Alca torda,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Open ocean; nests on sea cliffs. Tends to forage in cool waters less than 200' deep; so often concentrates over offshore shoals or ledges; sometimes closer to shore than other large auks. Nests on islands or mainland on cliffs or rocky shorelines.,Forages while swimming underwater. Catches most food 5-20' below surface; rarely may dive to 30'. May catch several fish during one dive. Sometimes steals fish from puffins or other auks.,1; perhaps rarely 2. Tan or greenish to white; variably marked with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 32-39 days. Young: Both parents bring fish in bills to feed nestling. Young leaves nest 14-25 days after hatching; before able to fly. Late in evening; young follows adult to cliff edge and then flutters down to water; and adult and young swim away.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on small fish; especially sand lance; also herring; sprat; capelin; stickleback; cod. Also eats crustaceans and marine worms. ,Usually first breeds at age of 4-5 years. Nests in colonies. May mate for life. Pair formation may take place within flocks on water or on common ground near colony. In display; male raises head; pointing bill up while giving growling call; then bows deeply; female sometimes does same. Members of pair also touch bills; preen each other's feathers. Nest site is in crevice in cliff; under boulders; on ledge; or in abandoned burrow of other species. Sometimes no nest built; usually small collection of pebbles; grass. 
Red-Crossbill,Loxia curvirostra,Finches,Conifer forests and groves. Seldom found away from conifers. Depending on region of continent; may breed mainly in pines; or may be in spruce; hemlock; Douglas-fir; or other evergreens. Different races may favor different forest types. Wandering flocks may appear in plantings of conifers in parks or suburbs well away from usual range.,Typically forages by clambering about over cones in evergreens. Forages in flocks. Different forms of Red Crossbill specialize on different kinds of conifers; with large-billed birds often choosing trees with larger cones.,3-4; sometimes 5; rarely 2. Pale greenish white or bluish white; with brown and purple dots mostly concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; 12-15 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Female spends much time brooding young at first; while male brings food for them and for her; later; both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 18-20 days after hatching.,Mostly seeds of conifers. Seeds of pines and other conifers are favored foods whenever available. Also eats buds of various trees; seeds of weeds and deciduous trees; some berries; insects. Much attracted to salt. Young are fed regurgitated seeds. ,Timing and distribution of nesting are quite irregular; the birds often breeding when cone crops are best. In many regions; nesting is typically in winter or spring; but may be at practically any season (except perhaps in mid to late fall). In courtship; male may perform flight song display; and may feed female. Nest: Placed on a horizontal branch in conifer; often well out from trunk; usually 10-40' above ground but can be lower or much higher. Nest (built by female) is a bulky open cup; loosely made of twigs; bark strips; grass; rootlets; wood chips; lined with fine grass; moss; lichens; feathers; hair. 
Red-Knot,Calidris canutus,Sandpipers,Tidal flats; shores; tundra (summer). In migration and winter on coastal mudflats and tidal zones; sometimes on open sandy beaches of the sort favored by Sanderlings. Nests on Arctic tundra; usually on rather high and barren areas inland from coast; but typically near a pond or stream.,On tidal flats; forages mostly by probing in mud with bill; finding food by touch. On dry sand and on tundra breeding grounds; forages mostly by sight; picking items from surface.,3-4. Pale olive-green; with small brown spots. Incubation is by both sexes (although male may do more); 21-22 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young at first; but female leaves before young are old enough to fly. Young feed themselves. Young are able to fly at about 18-20 days after hatching; become independent about that time.,Includes mollusks; insects; green vegetation; seeds. In migration and winter; feeds on small invertebrates that live in mud of intertidal zone; especially small mollusks; also marine worms; crustaceans. On breeding grounds; feeds mostly on insects; especially flies. Also eats much plant material; especially early in breeding season (when insects may be scarce); including shoots; buds; leaves; and seeds. ,Early in breeding season; male flies in high circles above territory; hovering on rapidly quivered wings and then gliding; while giving mellow whistled calls. Female may fly around territory with male. On ground; male displays with wings held high. Nest site is on ground on open tundra; usually near water. Nest is a shallow scrape lined with leaves; lichen; moss. 
Red-Phalarope,Phalaropus fulicarius,Sandpipers,Ocean; tundra in summer. For most of year found only out at sea; often very far from land. Favors areas with upwellings or tide rips; or where warm and cold currents converge; may regularly associate with whales. In summer on low-lying wet tundra near coast in high arctic.,Unlike any other sandpipers; phalaropes forage mostly while swimming; by picking items from water's surface or just below it. Often they spin in circles on shallow water; probably to stir things up and bring food closer to surface. In general; they feed very rapidly on very small prey. At sea; may land on mats of floating seaweed; and may pick parasites from backs of whales. On breeding grounds; also forages while walking or wading; and flutters up to catch insects in the air.,4; sometimes 2-3. Olive to buff; blotched with black or dark brown. Sometimes 2 females lay eggs in one nest. Incubation is by male only; 18-20 days. Young: Downy young leave nest within a day after hatching; male leads them to edge of nearby pond. Young are tended by male (rarely joined by female) but mostly feed themselves. Male may remain with young until they can fly; or may abandon them after just a few days; abandoned young can care for themselves. Age at first flight about 16-18 days.,Includes insects; mollusks; crustaceans. On tundra; eats many insects; especially aquatic ones; also small mollusks; crustaceans; worms; bits of plant material; rarely small fish. Diet in winter poorly known. ,In courtship; female flies in wide circle; calling. Female may chase male in the air; or pursues male on water; head hunched down between her shoulders. After leaving male to care for eggs; female will sometimes find a second mate and lay a second clutch of eggs. Nest site is on ground among low vegetation; usually near water. Nest is a shallow scrape lined with grass; lichens; moss. Both sexes make scrapes; female selects one; male adds nest lining. 
Red-bellied-Woodpecker,Melanerpes carolinus,Woodpeckers,Woodlands; groves; orchards; towns. Most common in deciduous forest; especially along rivers and in swamps. Also in mixed coniferous and deciduous forest; less often in pure stands of pine. May be found in rather open areas; such as forest edges and clearings; groves of trees in farm country; shade trees in suburbs.,Forages by searching for insects on tree trunks and major limbs. Climbs and perches among branches to pick berries and nuts; and sometimes catches flying insects in the air. Nuts and seeds taken in fall may be stored in bark crevices; eaten during winter.,4-5; sometimes 3-8. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); 12-14 days. Young: Are fed by both parents; and leave the nest about 22-27 days after hatching. Parents may continue to feed young for 6 weeks or more after they leave nest. 1 brood per year in north; 2-3 in south.,Omnivorous. Like most woodpeckers; eats many insects. Diet may be more than 50% plant material at some seasons; including acorns and other nuts; wild and cultivated fruits; seeds. Occasional items in diet include tree frogs; eggs of small birds; oozing sap; and even small fish. ,Uses many antagonistic displays in defending territory; including spreading wings; slow floating flight; and raising head feathers. Nest site is in cavity excavated in dead wood (tree; pole; fence post; or stump); usually less than 50' above ground but can be as high as 120'. Male may begin excavating several holes; with female selecting which one is completed and used. Also may use natural cavity; abandoned hole of other woodpecker; or nest box. 
Red-billed-Pigeon,Patagioenas flavirostris,Pigeons and Doves,River woodlands; tall brush. In Texas; found mostly in relatively undisturbed native woods of hackberry; mesquite; huisache; ebony; and other trees. Farther south; inhabits dry woodlands of various types; generally avoiding more humid regions of rain forest.,Forages mostly in trees and shrubs; climbing about among the branches to reach berries. Will also come to the ground to feed; including on waste grain in fields. Usually forages in pairs or small flocks.,1; rarely 2. White. Incubation apparently by both parents; incubation period not well known. If adults are disturbed on nest; they put on a distraction display; dropping from the nest and fluttering low over the ground. Young: Both parents probably feed young "pigeon milk." Development of young and age at first flight not well known. May raise several broods per year in the tropics.,Includes berries; seeds; nuts. Diet not known in detail. Feeds on many wild fruits and berries; including those of hackberry; mistletoe; wild fig; and many other plants. Also eats many acorns when available; and seeds of a variety of plants. ,Nesting behavior is not well known. Nest site is in tree; large shrub; or tangled vines; usually 8-30' above the ground; and usually on horizontal fork in branch. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is flimsy platform of sticks; lined with grasses and stems. 
Red-billed-Tropicbird,Phaethon aethereus,Tropicbirds,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Red-breasted-Merganser,Mergus serrator,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; open water; in winter; coastal bays. During nesting season around lakes and rivers; within the northern forest and northward into tundra regions. In winter mostly on coastal waters; including bays; estuaries; and open ocean; a few winter on ice-free reservoirs and large rivers.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater. Sometimes a group appears to hunt cooperatively; several birds lining up and driving schools of small fish into very shallow water; where the mergansers scoop them up without diving.,usually 7-10; sometimes 5-13. Olive-buff. Females sometimes lay eggs in each others' nests; occasionally in nests of other ducks. Incubation is by female only; 29-35 days. Young: Within a day after eggs hatch; female leads young to water; where they feed themselves. 2 or more broods may join; tended by 1 or more adult females; but young are left on their own within a few weeks. Young are capable of flight about 2 months after hatching.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on small fish; also crustaceans; aquatic insects; and sometimes frogs; tadpoles; or worms. Young ducklings eat mostly insects. ,In courtship display; male stretches neck forward and upward; then suddenly dips neck and forepart of body underwater; with head angled up out of water and bill open wide. Nest: female selects site on ground; usually near water; in a spot sheltered by dense plant growth or debris. Sometimes nests inside hollow stump; under rock; or in shallow burrow. Nest is a simple depression; lined with down. 
Red-breasted-Nuthatch,Sitta canadensis,Nuthatches,Conifer forests; in winter; also other trees. Nesting habitat almost always has many conifers; such as spruce; fir; hemlock; either in pure stands or mixed with deciduous trees. Mature forest preferred; perhaps because old decaying wood needed for nest sites. In migration and winter may appear in any wooded habitat; but conifers always chosen if available.,Forages by climbing up and down trunk and branches of trees. Sometimes catches flying insects in the air. May cache food items in bark crevices.,5-6; sometimes 4-7. White; spotted with reddish-brown. Female incubates; male brings food to female on and off nest. Incubation period about 12 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; young leave nest about 2-3 weeks after hatching. Probably 1 brood per year.,Includes both insects and seeds. Feeds mainly on insects and spiders in summer; in winter; eats many seeds; especially those of conifers. Young are fed mostly or entirely on insects and spiders. ,Unlike other nuthatches; has a soft musical song; used especially in courtship by male. In courtship display; male turns his back toward female; raises head; droops wings; and sways from side to side. Male also feeds female in courtship. Nest: Both sexes excavate nest cavity in rotten stub or snag; usually 5-40' above ground; rarely much higher. Rarely use old woodpecker holes or birdhouses. Sticky pitch is smeared around entrance to nest hole; this may prevent other creatures from entering. Adults avoid getting stuck in pitch by flying straight into hole. Apparently female does most of work of nest building. Nest in cavity made of soft grass; moss; bark fibers; feathers. 
Red-breasted-Sapsucker,Sphyrapicus ruber,Woodpeckers,Coniferous forest; aspen groves; in winter; also other trees. During summer on the northwest coast; the Red-breasted Sapsucker is often in forest of hemlock or spruce. Farther south in the mountains it is found in pine forest; always with a mixture of deciduous trees such as aspen; alder; willow. In winter some move south or into lowlands; occurring in deciduous or coniferous trees.,Drills tiny holes in tree bark; usually in neatly spaced rows; and then returns to them periodically to feed on the sap that oozes out. Also eats bits of cambium and other tree tissues; as well as insects that are attracted to the sap. Besides drilling sap wells; also gleans insects from tree trunks in more typical woodpecker fashion; and sallies out to catch insects in the air. Berries and fruits are eaten at all seasons.,5-6; sometimes 4-7. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); 11-15 days. Both parents feed young; bringing them insects; sap; and fruit. Young leave nest 23-28 days after hatching. Parents teach young the sapsucking habit; feed them for about 10 days after they leave nest. 1 brood per year.,Includes insects; tree sap; fruit. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including many ants (taken from tree trunks). Also regularly feeds on tree sap; and on berries and fruits. ,Courtship displays include pointing bill up and swaying from side to side. Nest: Nest site is usually in deciduous tree such as aspen; alder; cottonwood; or willow; but also in firs and other conifers. Nest cavity is often high; may be 50-60' or more above ground. Both sexes help excavate. Often uses same tree in subsequent years; but not same nest cavity. 
Red-cockaded-Woodpecker,Dryobates borealis,Woodpeckers,Open pine woodlands. Ideal habitat is mature pine woods (trees 80-100 or more years old); with very open understory maintained by frequent fires (the pines are fire-resistant). Most common in longleaf pine; but inhabits other pines as well; rarely cypress adjacent to pine woods.,Forages mainly on pine trunks and branches; flaking off bits of bark in search of insects underneath. Family groups may forage together; males tending to forage on branches and upper trunk; females on lower trunk.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. White. Incubation is by both parents and to some extent by additional helpers; breeding male is on nest at night. Incubation period notably short; about 10-11 days. Young: Are fed by both parents and by helpers. Young leave nest at about 26-29 days. 1 brood per year; rarely 2.,Mostly insects. Feeds mainly on insects and other arthropods; especially ants and beetles; also termites; roaches; centipedes; and others. Also eats some wild fruits and pine seeds. ,Taking part in nesting are the breeding pair plus 1-4 additional "helpers."  These helpers are mostly males (70-95% of those studied) and mostly the breeding pair's offspring from previous seasons. Nest: Preferred sites are cavities excavated in large live pines infected with red heart fungus (which gives tree soft center inside solid outer shell). Cavity usually 30-40' above ground; can be much lower or higher (to well above 100'). Entrance surrounded by tiny holes from which sticky resin oozes out; protecting nest from climbing predators. 
Red-crowned-Parrot,Amazona viridigenalis,African and New World Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Red-eyed-Vireo,Vireo olivaceus,Vireos,Woodlands; shade trees; groves. Breeds in deciduous and mixed forest; occasionally in conifers. Also well wooded suburbs; orchards; parks. Prefers open woods with undergrowth of saplings; clearings or edges of burns; areas along streams in solid forest; or prairie groves. Winters in lowland tropical forest in South America.,Forages in trees by picking insects from foliage and from undersides of leaves and flowers; often while hovering momentarily.,4; sometimes 3-5. White with brown or black spots near large end. Incubation is by female only; 11-14 days. Frequently parasitized by cowbirds; rarely deters cowbirds by burying their eggs under a second floor of nest. Young: Nestlings are fed by both parents. Young leave the nest 10-12 days after hatching.,Mostly insects; also berries. In summer feeds mainly on insects; including caterpillars; moths; beetles; wasps; bees; ants; bugs; flies; walkingsticks; cicadas; treehoppers; scale insects; also some snails and spiders. Also eats many berries; especially in late summer; including those of Virginia creeper; sumac; elderberry; blackberry; dogwood; many other. In winter in the tropics; may feed heavily on berries and small fruit. ,Male sings persistently throughout the day during the breeding season. In courtship; male displays to female with feathers sleeked down; swaying body and head from side to side; both birds then vibrate wings simultaneously. Nest: Placed usually 5-30' above the ground; sometimes 2-60' up; in deciduous shrub or sapling. Nest (built by female) is a compact; dainty cup; with its rim woven onto a horizontal forked twig. Made of strips of bark; grass stems; weeds; rootlets; spiderwebs; and cocoons. 
Red-faced-Cormorant,Phalacrocorax urile,Cormorants,Ocean; coast; islands. Spends most of its time close to shore in cool ocean waters; favoring rocky bays; straits between islands. Nests on rocky islands or coasts; on ledges of cliffs or steep slopes.,See family introduction. Solitary in foraging; may feed near bottom in rocky areas.,3-4. Bluish white; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by both sexes; probably about 31-34 days. Young:  probably fed by both parents. Age at which young leave nest estimated at 50-60 days.,Mostly fish. Feeds on a variety of fish; especially sculpins; also pollack; sand lance; others. Also eats crustaceans including crabs; shrimp; amphipods. ,Breeds in mixed colonies with other seabirds. In display; male perches with head over back; bill pointed up; moving head up and down; while quickly raising and lowering tips of folded wings so that white patches on flanks are rapidly covered and exposed; appearing to flash on and off. Nest:  site is on ledge (wide or narrow) of cliff or steep slope above water. Nest is mound of grass; seaweed; moss; debris; with deep hollow in center; sometimes lined with feathers. Nest may be re-used in subsequent years. 
Red-faced-Warbler,Cardellina rubrifrons,Wood Warblers,Open pine-oak forests in high mountains. In our area; breeds mostly in forests of Douglas-fir; Engelmann spruce; ponderosa pine; and southwestern white pine; at elevations between 6;400' and 9;000'; mainly where small groves of deciduous trees such as oak; maple; or aspen grow among the conifers. In winter in the tropics; found in forests of pine; oak; alder; and other trees; at upper elevations in mountains.,Prefers to forage in trees with dense foliage. Searches actively on outer parts of branches and twigs; and hovers to take insects from foliage. At times; does much of its foraging by flying out to take insects in mid-air. In summer; males tend to feed higher than females; pausing to sing as they forage. When not nesting; typically forages in mixed flocks with other birds.,Usually 3-4. Pinkish-white; flecked with brown. Incubated by female only; 13-15 days; sometimes 12-17. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave the nest 11-13 days after hatching. Parents may split the fledglings; each adult attending half the brood for up to 4-5 weeks. All fledglings leave nesting territories by early August in Arizona; even though the adults are still on territory. Probably 1 brood per year.,Probably mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; but undoubtedly feeds mostly on insects. Caterpillars may be important in diet; nestlings are fed many small green caterpillars. Also eats small flies; leafhoppers; and other insects. ,In most areas; males defend nesting territories by singing. In a few places; males are reported not to defend territories very strongly; regularly crossing near each other's nest sites; and even congregating in loose singing groups to attract females. Nest: On the ground; well hidden at base of shrub; rock; grass tuft; tree trunk; or under log. Usually placed in leaf litter on slope or steep bank. Open cup; built by female; on mass of dry leaves and conifer needles; constructed of grasses; weeds; and bark; lined with plant fibers and hair. 
Red-footed-Booby,Sula sula,Boobies and Gannets,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Red-headed-Woodpecker,Melanerpes erythrocephalus,Woodpeckers,Groves; farm country; orchards; shade trees in towns; large scattered trees. Avoids unbroken forest; favoring open country or at least clearings in the woods. Forest edges; orchards; open pine woods; groves of tall trees in open country are likely habitats. Winter habitats influenced by source of food in fall; such as acorns or beechnuts.,Opportunistic; with several foraging techniques. Flies out from a perch to catch insects in the air or on ground; climbs tree trunks and major limbs; clambers about in outer branches; hops on ground. Gathers acorns; beechnuts; and other nuts in fall; storing them in holes and crevices; then feeding on them during winter.,4-5; sometimes 3-7; rarely more. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night); 12-13 days. Young: Are fed by both parents; and leave the nest at about 27-31 days. Pairs may be starting on a 2nd nesting attempt while still feeding the fledglings from the first; 2nd brood may be raised in same nest but more often in new cavity; freshly excavated. 1 or 2 broods per year.,Omnivorous. Perhaps the most omnivorous of woodpeckers. Diet includes wide variety of insects; also spiders; earthworms; nuts; seeds; berries; wild and cultivated fruit; rarely small rodents. Sometimes eats eggs and nestlings of other birds. Also sometimes eats bark. ,Male establishes territory and advertises there with calling; drumming. In resident birds; male's winter territory may become breeding territory. Nest: Male's winter roosting cavity may be used for nest; or new cavity may be excavated (mostly by male); female indicates acceptance of site by tapping on tree. Nest cavity is in bare dead tree or dead limb; from a few feet above ground to 65' or higher. 
Red-legged-Kittiwake,Rissa brevirostris,Gulls and Terns,Ocean; islands. At sea found mostly over deep water; at and beyond edge of continental shelf. May forage farther from nesting colonies than Black-legged Kittiwake. Especially in winter may be very far from land; in North Pacific or near edge of pack ice in Bering Sea. Nests on ledges of steep cliffs above sea on islands.,Forages by dipping to surface of water or plunging into water from flight low over surface. Often forages in flocks; mixed with Black-legged Kittiwakes; over schools of fish. Red-legged Kittiwake has larger eye; possibly adaptation to feeding in dim light; may feed by day or night. Some food items such as lampfish and squid may be closer to surface at night.,One; sometimes two. Variable; gray to buff or greenish; with blotches or scrawls of brown. Incubation by both sexes; probably about 30 days; may incubate slightly longer than Black-legged Kittiwake on Pribilofs. Young: Both parents care for young; brooding them for first two weeks after hatching; feeding them by regurgitation. Young capable of flight at about 37 days; may return to nest to be fed for at least several more days.,Fish; squid; crustaceans. Feeds mainly on lampfish; pollack; squid; and small crustaceans such as amphipods. Fish eaten are mostly under 4" long. ,Breeds in colonies; associated with other seabirds. Courtship displays similar to those of Black-legged Kittiwake. Nest site is on ledge of vertical cliff; often smaller ledges than used by Black-legged Kittiwake. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow cup of mud; grass; kelp. Same site may be re-used each year; although nest must be rebuilt after effects of winter storms. 
Red-lored-Parrot,Amazona autumnalis,African and New World Parrots,Wide range of habitats including tropical rain forest; woodlands wet woodlands; cultivated areas with trees; plantations. Mostly below 2;500 feet.,NA,NA,NA,3-4 white eggs laid in a tree cavity. 26 day incubation and chicks fledge in about 60 days after hatching.
Red-masked-Parakeet,Psittacara erythrogenys,African and New World Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Red-naped-Sapsucker,Sphyrapicus nuchalis,Woodpeckers,Woodlands; aspen groves; in winter; also other trees. In summer mostly in mountains in mixed coniferous and deciduous forest; especially around aspens. During migration and winter it occurs in both mountains and lowlands; in deciduous trees; riverside willow groves; pine-oak woods; orchards.,Drills tiny holes in tree bark; usually in neatly spaced rows; and then returns to them periodically to feed on the sap that oozes out. Also eats bits of cambium and other tree tissues; as well as insects that are attracted to the sap. Besides drilling sap wells; also gleans insects from tree trunks in more typical woodpecker fashion; and sallies out to catch insects in the air. Berries and fruits are eaten at all seasons; and birds may concentrate in fruiting wild trees in winter.,4-6; sometimes 3-7. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); 10-13 days. Both parents feed young; bringing them insects; sap; and fruit. Young leave nest 25-29 days after hatching. Parents teach young the sapsucking habit; feed them for about 10 days after they leave nest. 1 brood per year.,Includes insects; tree sap; fruit. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including many ants (taken from tree trunks). Also regularly feeds on tree sap; and on berries and fruits. ,Courtship displays include pointing bill up to show off colored throat patch; ritualized tapping at nest site. Nest site is cavity in tree; usually deciduous tree such as aspen or poplar; 6-60' above ground. Often uses same tree in consecutive years; sometimes same nest hole. Favors live trees affected by heartwood decay fungus; which softens heartwood while leaving outer part of trunk firm; but will also nest in dead or dying conifers. Both sexes help excavate. 
Red-necked-Grebe,Podiceps grisegena,Grebes,Lakes; ponds; in winter; salt water. Summer:  on freshwater lakes or large ponds having some marsh vegetation; surrounded by prairie; northern forest; or sometimes tundra. Winter:  mostly on ocean; on protected bays but also miles offshore at times; also a few on some large lakes.,Forages while swimming underwater; or while swimming on surface with head submerged. Also takes items (such as insects) from on or above water's surface; or from waterside plants.,4-5; sometimes 2-6. Bluish-white or very pale buff; becoming nest-stained brown. Both sexes incubate; 20-23 days. Young:  Are able to swim shortly after hatching; are fed by both parents; and may ride on parents' backs. Age at first flight not well known; may be 10 weeks in some cases. Usually 1 brood per year; rarely 2.,Mostly insects and fish. Diet varies with season. May feed mainly on small fish in winter on coastal waters; in summer on marshes and ponds; feeds mainly on insects. Also eats crustaceans; mollusks; tadpoles; nereid worms; very small amounts of plant matter. Like other grebes; may eat feathers. ,Courtship displays complex; with loud calls; raising of crest. Members of pair may face each other and rise partly out of water; chest to chest; sit close together while turning heads from side to side; bring up bits of weed from underwater and perform ritual dance while holding weeds. Nest:  Site is in shallow water among marsh vegetation. Nest (built by both sexes) is a floating mass of plant material; with a definite depression at the top; anchored to standing plants. 
Red-necked-Phalarope,Phalaropus lobatus,Sandpipers,Ocean; bays; lakes; ponds; tundra in summer. At sea; often concentrates over upwellings or tide rips; sometimes around edges of kelp beds. Inland; stops on ponds or lakes with abundant small creatures to eat; often favors sewage ponds; where insects are numerous. Breeds in tundra regions; mainly on marshy edges of ponds and lakes.,Unlike any other sandpipers; phalaropes forage mostly while swimming; by picking items from water's surface or just below it. Often they spin in circles on shallow water; probably to stir things up and bring food closer to surface. In general; they feed very rapidly on very small prey.,4; sometimes 3. Olive to buff; blotched with dark brown. Rarely 2 or 3 females will lay eggs in one nest. Incubation is by male only; 17-21 days. Young: Downy young leave nest within a day after hatching; go to shore of pond. Male tends young and broods them while they are small; but young feed themselves. Male departs after about 2 weeks; young are able to fly at about 3 weeks.,Insects; crustaceans; mollusks. Diet varies with season and habitat. On breeding grounds and on fresh waters in migration; eats mostly insects; including adults and larvae of flies; beetles; caddisflies. During stopovers on alkaline lakes; may eat many brine shrimp. Winter diet on ocean poorly known; probably includes small crustaceans and mollusks. ,Female seeking mate makes short flights; with whirring of wings and calling. In courtship; female swims around male; tries to make him follow her; male usually reluctant; shows interest only gradually. In some cases; after leaving male to care for eggs and young; female finds another mate and lays another clutch of eggs. Nest site is on ground; usually in low vegetation near water. Nest is a shallow scrape lined with grass; leaves. Both sexes make scrapes; female chooses one; probably both sexes then help build nest. 
Red-necked-Stint,Calidris ruficollis,Sandpipers,Mudflats; shores; tundra in summer. In Alaska found on coastal tundra; or dry foothills tundra not far from coast; also at nearby rivermouths and shores. In migration; occurs in the same kinds of situations as those favored by Semipalmated and Western sandpipers; including coastal estuaries and tidal flats; also muddy edges of ponds and lakes inland.,Forages by walking; usually on shore rather than in shallow water; picking rapidly at tiny items on surface. Sometimes probes in mud with bill.,Usually 4. Olive to buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is apparently by both parents; incubation period not well known; probably about 3 weeks. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching; probably find all their own food. Young may be tended by both parents at first; but female often abandons them shortly after hatching; leaving male to care for the young. Age at first flight not well known.,Mostly insects and crustaceans. Diet not well known; probably similar to that of Semipalmated Sandpiper. In breeding season may feed mostly on insects; especially flies and their larvae. During migration; probably eats a wide variety of small crustaceans that live in shallow water or wet mud; also insects; small mollusks; worms. ,Breeding behavior not well known. Male displays over breeding territory by fluttering and gliding; giving a repeated nasal call; at the end of the display; he holds the wings high over his back in a sharp "V" and drops to the ground. Nest site is on ground; often on moss hummock in rocky tundra with dwarf willows nearby. Nest is shallow depression in moss or other vegetation; typically lined with willow leaves. 
Red-shouldered-Hawk,Buteo lineatus,Hawks and Eagles,Bottomland woods; wooded streamsides; swamps. In east; nests in deciduous and mixed forest; with tall trees and relatively open understory; often along rivers and swamps. May move into more open habitats in winter. In west; typically in riverside forest or in oak woodland; sometimes in eucalyptus groves. Florida birds may be in pine woods; mangroves.,Usually hunts by watching from a perch; either within forest or in open; swooping down when it locates prey. Sometimes flies very low in open areas; taking creatures by surprise. May use hearing as well as sight to locate prey.,Usually 3-4; sometimes 2. Pale bluish-white; blotched with brown and lavender. Incubation is mostly by female; roughly 33 days. Male brings food to female at nest; and may take a turn sitting on eggs while female eats. Young: Female remains with young most of time for first 1-3 weeks after they hatch; male brings food; female feeds it to nestlings. Young leave the nest at about 5-7 weeks after hatching; and are fed by parents for another 8-10 weeks.,Includes small mammals; amphibians; reptiles; birds. Diet varies with region and season. Main items often mammals such as voles and chipmunks; at other times frogs and toads; may eat many crayfish in some areas. Also eats snakes; small birds; mice; large insects; occasionally fish; rarely carrion. ,In courtship; male displays by flying upward; calling; then diving steeply. Pairs may soar together in circles; calling; high over nesting territory. Nest site is usually in deciduous tree; sometimes in conifer; located in fork of main trunk or at base of branches against trunk; usually 35-65' above ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is platform of sticks and other material; lined with bark; moss; and sprigs of green vegetation. Nest may be reused for more than one season. 
Red-tailed-Hawk,Buteo jamaicensis,Hawks and Eagles,Open country; woodlands; prairie groves; mountains; plains; roadsides. Found in any kind of terrain that provides both some open ground for hunting and some high perches. Habitats may include everything from woodland with scattered clearings to open grassland or desert with a few trees or utility poles.,Does most hunting by watching from a high perch; then swooping down to capture prey in its talons. Also hunts by flying over fields; watching for prey below. Small prey carried to perch; large prey often partly eaten on ground.,2-3; sometimes 4; rarely 1-5. Whitish; blotched with brown. Incubation is by both parents; 28-35 days. Young: Female remains with young most of the time during first few weeks. Male brings most food; and female tears it into small pieces to feed to the young. After about 4-5 weeks; food is dropped in nest; and young feed on it themselves. Young leave the nest about 6-7 weeks after hatching; but not capable of strong flight for another 2 weeks or more. Fledglings may remain with parents for several more weeks.,Varied; includes small mammals; birds; reptiles. Diet varies with location and season. Mammals such as voles; rats; rabbits; and ground squirrels often major prey; also eats many birds (up to size of pheasant) and reptiles; especially snakes. Sometimes eats bats; frogs; toads; insects; various other creatures; may feed on carrion. ,In courtship; male and female soar in high circles; with shrill cries. Male may fly high and then dive repeatedly in spectacular maneuvers; may catch prey and pass it to female in flight. Nest site is variable. Usually in tree; up to 120' above ground; nest tree often taller than surrounding trees. Also nests on cliff ledges; among arms of giant cactus; or on artificial structures such as towers or buildings. Nest (built by both sexes) a bulky bowl of sticks; lined with finer materials; often with leafy green branches added. 
Red-tailed-Tropicbird,Phaethon rubricauda,Tropicbirds,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Red-throated-Loon,Gavia stellata,Loons,Coastal waters; bays; estuaries; in summer; tundra lakes. Breeding habitat includes small ponds as well as larger lakes; mostly on tundra but sometimes within edge of northern forest. Mainly on ocean in winter (a few on large lakes); often in shallower water than other loons; as in protected bays; large estuaries.,Loons do their foraging by diving from the surface and swimming underwater. They often swim along the surface with their heads partly submerged; peering about underwater; watching for prey before they dive. They are propelled mainly by their feet; but may sometimes use their wings also when turning or in bursts of speed. Loons find their food by sight.,Usually 2; sometimes 1; rarely 3. Olive with blackish-brown spots. Incubation by both sexes (though female may do more); 24-29 days. Young:  Leave nest and take to water about 1 day after hatching. Both parents feed young; rarely carry young on their backs. Young can fly at about 7 weeks. 1 brood per year.,Mostly fish. Includes cod and herring on salt water; and trout; salmon; and char on fresh water. Also shrimps; crabs; snails; mussels; aquatic insects; leeches; and frogs. In early spring in high arctic; may feed on plant material also. Young are fed mainly insects and crustaceans for first few days.,May mate for life. Courtship displays include both birds rapidly dipping bills in water; diving and swimming past each other; making fast rushes underwater. Both members of pair defend nesting territory against intruding loons. Nest:  Site; often re-used from year to year; is on shore or in shallow water. Apparently both sexes help build nest. Nest is a heap of vegetation; or sometimes simple scrape on top of hummock; nest material may be added after incubation begins. 
Red-throated-Pipit,Anthus cervinus,Wagtails and Pipits,Tundra in summer; during migration; fields. In Alaska; breeds on tundra; mostly in fairly dry rocky areas next to hummocky sedge meadows. Migrants elsewhere in North America have been mostly in short grass or plowed fields; occasionally at edge of water.,Forages by walking on the ground; picking up items from ground or from low growth. Often probes with its bill among low vegetation. Large insects may be pounded on the ground before they are eaten.,5-6; sometimes 3-7. Pale gray to buff; finely spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by female only; about 11-13 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 11-15 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Diet in North America is not well known. In Eurasia; summer diet is mostly insects; including many midges; crane flies; mosquitoes; beetles; caterpillars; small bees; moths; and many others. Also eats spiders; centipedes; small snails; and seeds of grasses and other plants. ,To defend nesting territory; male performs flight-song: flies up; glides a short distance; then sails or parachutes down while singing. In courtship; male faces female; quivers wings and tail; and raises bill to show off red throat. Nest site is on ground; usually against side of hummock or partly sheltered by rock or low shrub. Male apparently begins nest by scraping small hollow in moss; female builds nest; with male bringing much of material. Nest is cup of grass; leaves; moss; lined with finer grass and sometimes with animal hair or feathers. 
Red-whiskered-Bulbul,Pycnonotus jocosus,Bulbuls,Suburbs with plantings of exotic fruiting trees. Introduced in North America; found only in residential areas with wide variety of exotic trees and shrubs that provide berries and small fruits at all times of year. In native range in southern Asia; found in forest edges; semi-open areas; towns.,Except when nesting; travels in flocks to feed at fruiting plants. Takes insects by flying out to capture them in mid-air; hovering to pick them from bark; or searching among foliage.,Usually 3. Pinkish; profusely mottled with purple or reddish spots. Incubation is by both parents; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Age of young at first flight not well known.,Berries; small fruits; insects. With its small bill; usually does not feed on large fruits until they are overripe or punctured by other birds. Important items in Florida include berries and fruits of Brazilian pepper; figs; lantana; jasmine; and others. Takes nectar; eats pieces of flowers and green shoots of vegetation. Also eats many insects. ,In Florida; breeding season is mainly February to June. Florida birds seem not to defend territories strongly; often tolerating other bulbuls near the nest. In courtship display; one bird may approach the other; fluttering its wings and bowing; both birds raise and lower crests repeatedly. Nest site is usually fairly low in shrub; vine; or small tree; typically about 2-8' above the ground; often well concealed. Nest; placed in fork of branch; is a cup made of grass; weeds; rootlets; and casuarina needles. Outside of nest usually decorated with pieces of paper or plastic; large flakes of bark; or other debris. 
Red-winged-Blackbird,Agelaius phoeniceus,Blackbirds and Orioles,Breeds in marshes; brushy swamps; hayfields; forages also in cultivated land and along edges of water. Breeds most commonly in freshwater marsh; but also in wooded or brushy swamps; rank weedy fields; hayfields; upper edges of salt marsh. Often forages in other open habitats; such as fields and mudflats; outside the breeding season; flocks gather in farm fields; pastures; feedlots.,Forages mostly while walking on ground; also sometimes up in shrubs and trees. Outside the breeding season; usually forages in flocks; often associated with other blackbirds and starlings.,3-4; rarely 2-6. Pale blue-green; with markings of black; brown; purple concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; 10-12 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings (but female does more). Young leave nest about 11-14 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including beetles; caterpillars; grasshoppers; and others; also spiders; millipedes; snails. Majority of adult's annual diet (roughly three-fourths) is seeds; including those of grasses; weeds; and waste grain. Also eats some berries and small fruits. ,To defend his territory and attract a mate; male perches on high stalk with feathers fluffed out and tail partly spread; lifts leading edge of wing so that red shoulder patches are prominent; and sings. Also sings in slow; fluttering flight. One male often has more than one mate. Adults are very aggressive in nesting territory; attacking larger birds that approach; and loudly protesting human intruders. Nest: Placed in marsh growth such as cattails or bulrushes; in bushes or saplings close to water; or in dense grass in fields. Nest (built by female) is bulky open cup; lashed to standing vegetation; made of grass; reeds; leaves; rootlets; lined with fine grass. 
Reddish-Egret,Egretta rufescens,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Coastal tidal flats; salt marshes; shores; lagoons. Does most feeding in calm shallow waters along coast; in protected bays and estuaries. Nesting habitat is mostly in red mangrove swamps in Florida; on arid coastal islands covered with thorny brush in Texas.,Has a wide variety of feeding behaviors. Often very active; running through shallows with head tilted to one side; suddenly changing direction or leaping sideways. May stand still and partly spread wings; schools of small fish may instinctively seek shelter in the shaded area thus created. Also feeds more placidly at times.,3-4; sometimes 2-7. Pale blue-green. Incubation is by both sexes; probably about 25-26 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. Young may leave ground nests at about 4 weeks and wander about island; but probably not capable of sustained flight until 6-7 weeks.,Mostly fish. Primarily eats small fish; with minnows; mullet; and killifish reported as major percentages; also frogs; tadpoles; crustaceans; rarely aquatic insects. ,Generally breeds in spring in Texas; in Florida may breed mainly in winter or spring. In courtship; male perches in future nesting site; stretches head and neck upward and backward with shaggy feathers fully raised; then tosses head forward repeatedly. May perform a variant of this display in flight. Male also walks in circles around female standing in shallows; tossing his head and raising one or both wings. Breeds in colonies. Nest:  Site is typically on ground in Texas; 3-15' above water in mangroves in Florida. Nest; built by both sexes; a platform of sticks or grass. 
Redhead,Aythya americana,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; saltwater bays; estuaries; in summer; fresh marshes. For nesting season favors large marshes in prairies or intermountain valleys. Migrants gather on large lakes. In winter; mainly on coastal bays and lagoons; also on freshwater lakes inland.,forages by diving; usually in water a few feet deep; or by dabbling and up-ending in very shallow water. In winter on shallow coastal lagoons may do most feeding by simply dipping head underwater.,usually 9-14; although true "normal" clutch size difficult to determine. Dull white to pale olive buff. Incubation is by female only; 23-29 days. Young: female leads young away from nest about a day they hatch. Young feed themselves; capable of flight at about 60-65 days.,aquatic plants; insects. Diet is mainly leaves; stems; seeds; and roots of aquatic plants: shoalgrass; pondweeds; smartweeds; sedges; waterlilies; and others. Also eats many aquatic insects; especially in summer; plus mollusks; rarely small fish. ,Nest site is in dense marsh (especially bulrushes) above shallow water; occasionally on dry ground. Bulky nest is built up of dead vegetation and anchored to standing growth; lined with down. Nesting is complicated by parasitic tendencies; typically laying eggs in nests of other Redheads and other waterbirds. Most females apparently are semi-parasites; laying several eggs in nests of other birds; then raising a clutch of their own. Several may lay eggs in a nest that is never incubated; such "dump nests" have been reported with up to 87 eggs. 
Redwing,Turdus iliacus,Thrushes,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Rhinoceros-Auklet,Cerorhinca monocerata,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; tide-rips; nests in burrows on islands. Often far from land; but may feed close to shore; especially where tidal currents near islands cause upwellings or concentrations of food. In winter flocks may spend night on coastal bays; flying farther out to sea to forage by day. Nests on islands; in burrows in soil under grass; shrubs; trees.,Forages while swimming underwater. Can remain submerged for up to 2 minutes. May tend to forage closer to shore than puffins.,one. White; usually spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by both sexes; 39-52 days; average 45 days. Young: both parents feed young; carrying fish in bill to nest. Young leaves nest about 7-8 weeks after hatching.,Fish; crustaceans. Food brought to nestlings is mostly small fish; particularly sand lance; herring; and anchovy; also rockfish; smelt; saury; and others. Favors fish that gathers in dense schools. Diet of adults probably similar. Also eats crustaceans. ,Breeds in colonies; mostly on islands. Generally active around colonies only in evening and at night; although at some colonies the adults visit by day as well. Courtship displays include members of pair nibbling at each other's bills. Advertise ownership of nest site by standing upright; with wings partly opened; pointing bill up and hissing. Nest site is in burrow in ground; typically on slight slope covered with grass; shrubs; trees; sometimes in steep slope or cliff. Burrow up to 20' long; usually 5-10'; with one or more side branches. Nest is in chamber in burrow; a shallow cup of moss; twigs. 
Ridgways-Rail,Rallus obsoletus,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Salt marshes along the coast; also brackish and freshwater marshes inland. Along the Pacific Coast; strictly a bird of salt marsh; sometimes in adjacent brackish marsh. The "Yuma" Clapper Rail inhabits freshwater marsh along the lower Colorado River and nearby areas.,Forages by walking in shallow water or on mud; especially on falling tide or at low tide; picking up items from the ground or vegetation; sometimes probing in mud or water.,Usually 7-11; sometimes 5-12 or more. Pale yellow to olive-buff; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-29 days. ,Includes crustaceans; insects; fish. Diet varies with locality; and includes a wide variety of small prey. Crustaceans often favored; especially crabs; also crayfish and others. Also eats many aquatic insects; small fish; mollusks; worms; frogs. Eats seeds at times.,Courtship displays are not well known. Male may feed female. Nest site is in clump of grass or other vegetation in marsh; near the upper reaches of high tide; or on bank near water. Nest (built mostly by male) is well-built cup of grasses and sedges; lined with finer material; often with vegetation woven into a canopy over nest. Often a ramp of plant material leads from ground up to nest. 
Ring-billed-Gull,Larus delawarensis,Gulls and Terns,Lakes; bays; coasts; piers; dumps; plowed fields. Associated with water at all seasons; although it does much of its feeding on land. Favors fresh water as much as salt water; but often common along coast; especially at harbors and estuaries; rarely any distance offshore. Common around cities; docks; farm fields; landfills; other human-altered habitats.,Opportunistic. Wide variety of foraging behaviors while walking; wading; swimming; flying. May steal food from other birds. Often scavenges in garbage dumps and other places where food scraps may have been tossed out.,2-4; sometimes 1-8. Gray to olive; blotched with brown. (Clutches of more than 4 eggs result from more than one female. Sometimes two females form "pair" and share nest.)  Incubation by both sexes; 23-28 days. Young: Both parents bring food for young; and brood them while they are small. Young may wander out of nest by 2nd day; but remain in immediate area. Young capable of flight about 5 weeks after hatching; become independent 5-10 days later.,Omnivorous. Diet varies with location and season; but major items include insects; fish; earthworms; grain; rodents; and refuse. Forages in freshly plowed fields for grubs and earthworms. ,Breeds in colonies; sometimes associated with California or Herring gulls. In courtship; both birds stretch upright and alternately face toward and away from each other; male feeds female. Nest site is on ground near water in area with sparse plant growth. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow cup of grasses; twigs; moss. 
Ring-necked-Duck,Aythya collaris,Ducks and Geese,Wooded lakes; ponds; in winter; also rivers; bays. In summer on freshwater marshes; ponds; and bogs; mainly in openings in forested country. In migration and winter on ponds; lakes; slow-moving rivers; sometimes on coastal estuaries; but generally not on saltwater bays.,Forages by diving; usually in water a few feet deep. Also forages at surface and sometimes up-ends in shallows. Opportunistic; it may move into flooded fields to feed.,8-10; sometimes 6-14. Vary in color: olive-gray; pale brown; pale buff. Incubation is by female only; 25-29 days. Young: female leads young to water 12-24 hours after they hatch; young may return to nest at night. Unlike many diving ducks; female and brood often hide in marsh rather than seeking safety on open water. Young find their own food; are capable of flight 49-55 days after hatching. Female may remain with young until they are old enough to fly; unlike most ducks.,mostly aquatic plants; insects. Diet varies with season and habitat. Feeds on seeds; stems; and roots of many aquatic plants; including pondweeds; sedges; smartweeds; grasses; algae; and others. Also eats aquatic insects and mollusks. Young ducklings feed mainly on insects. ,Pair formation activity begins in winter. Courtship displays by male include laying head far back and then thrusting it forward; also swimming with head feathers erected; nodding rapidly. Nest site is on dry hummock; clump of brush; or mat of floating vegetation; close to open water. Nest is shallow bowl of grasses; sedges; weeds; lined with down. 
Ring-necked-Pheasant,Phasianus colchicus,Pheasants and Grouse,Farms; fields; marsh edges; brush. May live in any semi-open habitat. Sometimes in open grassland but more often in brushy meadows; woodland edges; hedgerows; farmland with mixed crops. Access to water may be important; pheasants are often common around edges of marshes; and are rarely found in very arid places.,Typically feeds on ground; sometimes in trees. On ground; scratches with feet or digs with bill to uncover food.,Usually 10-12; sometimes 6-15 or more. Plain olive-buff; rarely pale blue. Females sometimes lay eggs in each others' nests or in those of other birds; clutches of more than about 18 probably result from two or more females. Incubation is by female only; 23-28 days. Young: Downy young leave nest with female shortly after hatching; mostly feed themselves. Male may rarely accompany female and brood. Young capable of short flights at about 12 days; but stay with female for 10-12 weeks.,Omnivorous. Diet varies with season and place. Feeds on wide variety of grains and smaller seeds; fresh green shoots; buds; roots; berries; insects; spiders; earthworms; snails; rarely eats lizards; snakes; frogs; rodents. Diet may include more seeds in winter; more insects in summer. ,Male defends territory by taking raised perch; giving crowing call while briefly drumming with wings. One male may have several mates; the females associating with each other in a small flock on his territory. In courtship; male struts in half-circle around female with back and tail feathers tilted toward her; near wing drooping; face wattles swollen. Nest site is on ground in dense cover. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression lined with grass; leaves; weeds. 
Ringed-Kingfisher,Megaceryle torquata,Kingfishers,Rivers; large streams; ponds; nests in banks. In Texas; most common along Rio Grande in areas where tall trees and brush border the river; also; increasingly; on ponds; streams elsewhere in southern part of state. In the tropics; found around almost any body of fresh water in lowlands; also in mangrove swamps on coast.,Seeks its food mostly by perching high (usually 15-35' up; higher than other kingfishers) and watching the water. When it spots a fish (or other prey) close to the surface; it plunges headfirst; catching the fish in its bill. Seldom hovers over the water before diving.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White. Incubation is by both parents; incubation period not well known. Young: Evidently fed by both parents. Young leave the nest about 5 weeks after hatching; are probably cared for by the adults for some time thereafter.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on fish; especially those 2-6" long. Also eats some frogs; small snakes; probably other aquatic creatures. ,In the tropics; sometimes nests in loose colonies where a large dirt bank is especially favorable for nesting. Such sites are not always near water; sometimes in road cuts or other artificial banks more than a mile from water. Apparently nests only as isolated pairs in United States. Nest site is in burrow excavated in steep or vertical dirt bank. Both sexes help to dig burrow; which may be 5-8' long; with an enlarged nest chamber at the end. Little or no nest material added; but debris may accumulate in chamber. 
Rivolis-Hummingbird,Eugenes fulgens,Hummingbirds,Mountain glades; pine-oak woods. In southwestern U.S.; usually in mountains at elevations of 5;000-9;000 feet. Inhabits shady canyons with sycamore and maple; open hillsides with pine-oak woodland; coniferous forest of higher mountains. Less restricted to streamsides than Blue-throated Hummingbird.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage or from bark; sometimes takes spiders and trapped insects from spider webs.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; probably about 16 days. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers. Also does much foraging in woodland away from flowers; watching from a perch and then flying out to catch passing insects. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Breeding and courtship behavior not well known. Male will sing a squeaky; scratchy song from a favorite perch in between bouts of chasing rivals. Nest site is in a tree such as pine or maple; 10-60 feet above the ground; saddled on a horizontal branch. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of moss; plant fibers; spider webs; lined with plant down and sometimes feathers. The outside is camouflaged with bits of lichen. 
Rock-Pigeon,Columba livia,Pigeons and Doves,Sustains itself in the wild around cities; farms; cliffs; bridges. In North America most common around cities; also in suburban areas and farms; occasionally in wild places far from human dwellings. In native range; nested on cliffs along coast and in inland mountains and gorges.,Forages mostly by walking on the ground. Sometimes forages in trees or shrubs to take berries there; climbing about awkwardly. Often feeds in flocks.,2; sometimes 1. Incubation is by both parents; 16-19 days. Young: Both parents feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest at about 25-32 days; or later in cold weather. A pair may raise up to 5 or more broods per year.,Mostly seeds. Away from cities; feeds on waste grain; seeds of many grasses and other plants; sometimes berries or acorns; may eat a few earthworms or insects. In cities; may live largely on bread crumbs; popcorn; or other junk food provided by humans. ,May mate for life. In courtship; male spreads tail; puffs up chest; and struts about; often strutting in circles around female; repeatedly bowing and cooing. Nest: Natural sites are on sheltered cliff ledges. In cities and around human dwellings; uses artificial replacements such as window ledges of tall buildings; barn lofts; rain gutters; many others. Nest (built by female; with material supplied by male) is platform of twigs; grass. Pair may use same site repeatedly; adding to nest each time. 
Rock-Ptarmigan,Lagopus muta,Pheasants and Grouse,Above timberline in mountains; bleak tundra of northern coasts. Summers on relatively dry; open tundra; with rock outcrops and arid ridges mixed with areas of dwarf willow and birch; sedge meadows. On islands (such as Aleutians); may occupy all open habitats. In winter; many remain in summer habitat; but some move into shrubby areas; openings in northern forest.,Forages while walking by picking rapidly at vegetation; nipping off food with bill. In winter; may sometimes follow herds of caribou or musk-ox; feeding where animals have scraped away the snow.,4-13; usually 7-9. Pale buff with brown spots. Incubation is by female only; usually about 21 days; begins after laying next to last egg. Young: Downy chicks leave nest with adult female within a day after hatching. Female tends young; but young feed themselves. Capable of short flights at 7-10 days; can fly fairly well at 10-15 days. Young are independent at age of about 10-12 weeks.,Mostly buds; leaves; and seeds. Adults are almost entirely vegetarian; feeding on buds; catkins; leaves; flowers; berries; and seeds. Major food sources include willow; dwarf birch; alder; saxifrage; crowberry. Also eats some insects; spiders; snails; young chicks feed on these items heavily at first. Regularly swallows grit to help with digesting rough plant material. ,Male defends territory in spring with conspicuous display flight: flaps very rapidly; glides high; then flutters to ground while giving staccato call. In courtship display; male raises red combs above eyes; fans tail; and walks in circles around female; dragging one wing on ground. Nest site is on ground in relatively barren; rocky area; usually near large rock. Nest (built mostly by female) is shallow depression; lined with small amounts of moss; lichen; grass; feathers. 
Rock-Sandpiper,Calidris ptilocnemis,Sandpipers,Rocky shores; nests on mossy tundra. In winter typically on rocky shores or rock jetties; foraging mostly in zone below high-tide mark; especially on mats of algae or among mussels or barnacles. Breeds on tundra; generally on drier and more barren stretches with sparse cover of lichen; moss; grasses.,forages by moving about slowly on rocks; or walking on mudflats or tundra. Finds its food visually.,usually 4. Olive to buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is usually by both sexes; about 20 days. Occasionally only one parent (either one) incubates. If predators threaten nest; adult may perform distraction display; fluttering away as if wing is broken. Young: may leave the nest within a few hours after hatching. Usually tended by male; rarely by female or by both parents. Young find all their own food. Age at first flight not well known; probably about 3 weeks.,mostly insects and other invertebrates. Insects may be main part of diet on breeding grounds; but also eats crustaceans; mollusks; marine worms. Unlike most sandpipers; also eats some plant material; including berries; seeds; moss; and algae. On migration and winter; diet is mostly small mollusks; crustaceans; and insects. ,Male defends territory by flying in wide circle with fluttering wingbeats; giving trilled calls. In aggressive display on ground; male raises one wing. Nest site is on ground on open dry tundra; often on a raised area of lichen or moss. Nest is a deep scrape; usually lined with lichen; leaves; grass. Male begins scrape; female may add some lining. 
Rock-Wren,Salpinctes obsoletus,Wrens,Rocky slopes; canyons. Breeds in a variety of rocky places. Found at elevations from low canyons to high in mountains; wherever surroundings are very open and arid; but scarce in hot desert regions in summer. Winters in rocky places at low elevations; sometimes on rock levees or on stone riprap below dams; especially when it wanders east. In the absence of rocks it may establish winter territory around stacks of hay bales; pieces of farm equipment; or other landmarks.,Forages on the ground in dry places; and on steep dirt banks and rocky cliffs with many cracks and openings. Uses long bill to probe in crevices among rocks. Sometimes forages among tangles of low vegetation; or low on trunks of trees.,5-6; sometimes 4-8. White; lightly dotted with reddish brown. Incubation is probably by female; incubation period not well known. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known.,Mostly insects and spiders. Diet is not well known. Probably feeds mostly on insects; including beetles; ants; grasshoppers; and many others; also spiders and probably other arthropods. ,Nesting behavior is not well known. Male sings to defend nesting territory. Nest site is usually in crevice among boulders; in hole in dirt bank; under a rock ledge; in crevice in stone building; or similarly sheltered site; rarely in low tree cavity. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is cup of grass; weeds; bark strips; twigs; rootlets; lined with finer materials such as animal hair; spiderwebs; feathers. Often marked by "paving" of small stones; sometimes with bones and other debris; laid out on ground in front of the entrance to the cranny where the nest is located. 
Rose-breasted-Grosbeak,Pheucticus ludovicianus,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Deciduous woods; orchards; groves. Breeds mostly in open deciduous woods; sometimes in mixed woods; favoring edges or openings with combination of shrubs and tall trees rather than unbroken forest. In migration; may occur in any wooded or semi-open area. Winters in the tropics; mostly at forest edge or in second-growth woods in lowlands and foothills.,Forages mostly in shrubs and trees; searching for food among foliage. Sometimes hovers to take insects from foliage or bark; or flies out to catch insects in mid-air.,3-5; typically 4. Pale greenish blue; spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by both parents; 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 9-12 days after hatching. Male may care for fledglings while female begins a new nest. 1-2 broods per year.,Mostly insects; seeds; and berries. About half of annual diet may be insects; including beetles; caterpillars; grasshoppers; true bugs; and others; also spiders and snails. Eats many seeds; including those of trees such as elms; and sometimes eats buds and flowers. May feed heavily on berries and small fruits in late summer and fall. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory; and may fight actively with intruding males. In courtship; male may partly spread wings and tail; draw head back; and approach female while singing. Nest: Placed in deciduous tree or large shrub (occasionally in conifer); usually 5-20' above ground; sometimes much higher. Nest (built mostly by female) is an open cup; rather loosely made of twigs; weeds; leaves; lined with finer twigs; rootlets; and sometimes animal hair. May be so flimsy that eggs are visible through the nest from below. 
Rose-ringed-Parakeet,Psittacula krameri,Lovebirds and Australasian Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Rose-throated-Becard,Pachyramphus aglaiae,Becards; Tityras and allies,Wooded canyons; river groves; sycamores. In Arizona; usually along streams at middle elevations; especially in groves of sycamores and cottonwoods; sometimes in pure cottonwood groves with understory of mesquites. In Texas; generally in native woodland near Rio Grande. In Mexico and Central America; widespread in dry woods; canyons; locally up into mountain forest.,Forages mostly by watching from a perch; then making short flights out to capture insects; returning to perch to eat them. Takes most insects from foliage while hovering briefly; also catches some in mid-air. Does much of its foraging within the shady canopy of tall trees.,4-6. Whitish to buff; heavily blotched with brown. Incubation is by female; incubation period not well known. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave nest about 3 weeks after hatching.,Includes insects and berries. Diet not well known. In summer in United States; probably feeds mostly on insects. Also known to eat many small fruits and berries; perhaps especially in southern parts of range. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing. Has a thin; rhythmic "dawn song;" usually heard only before sunrise. Nest: Usually suspended at the end of a long hanging branch; under the shady canopy of a large tree (sycamore or cottonwood in Arizona); up to 50' above the ground. Nest (built mostly by female; with some help from male) is a very large globular mass of vegetation; with the entrance low on one side; made of bark strips; grass; weeds; vines; spiderwebs; and other materials. More material may be added even after incubation begins. 
Roseate-Spoonbill,Platalea ajaja,Ibises and Spoonbills,Coastal marshes; lagoons; mudflats; mangrove keys. Forages in shallow water with muddy bottom; in both salt and fresh water; including tidal ponds; coastal lagoons; extensive inland marshes. Nests in colonies; in Florida mainly in red mangroves; farther west in willows or on coastal islands in low scrub; including mesquite and salt cedar.,Forages by wading in shallow muddy water; sweeping bill from side to side with mandibles slightly open; detecting prey by feel. Sometimes picks up items that it has found by sight.,2-3; sometimes 1-5. White; spotted with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 22-24 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Young clamber about near nest; may leave nest after 5-6 weeks; capable of strong flight at roughly 7-8 weeks.,Small fish; aquatic invertebrates. Diet is mostly small fish such as minnows and killifish; also shrimp; crayfish; crabs; aquatic insects (especially beetles); mollusks; slugs. Eats some plant material; including roots and stems of sedges. ,Breeds mainly during winter in Florida; during spring in Texas. Nests in colonies. At beginning of breeding season; entire flock may suddenly fly up; for no apparent reason; and circle the area. In courtship; male and female first interact aggressively; later perch close together; present sticks to each other; cross and clasp bills. Nest site is in mangroves; tree; shrub; usually 5-15' above ground or water; sometimes on ground. Nest (built mostly by female; with material brought by male) a bulky platform of sticks; with deep hollow in center lined with twigs; leaves. 
Roseate-Tern,Sterna dougallii,Gulls and Terns,Coastal; salt bays; estuaries; ocean. Nests on sandy or rocky islands with some low plant cover; close to shallow waters for feeding; especially in protected bays and estuaries. Forages in coastal waters and sometimes well offshore; with a seeming preference for warmer waters.,Forages mostly by patrolling in flight above water and then plunging to catch fish below surface. Sometimes dips down in flight to take prey from surface of water. May hover less than most terns.,1-2; sometimes 3. Cream to pale olive; blotched with blackish brown. Incubation is by both sexes (female may do more); 21-26 days. Young: Are fed by both parents; may move away from nest to better shelter a few days after hatching. Age at first flight usually 27-30 days; but remain with parents at least 2 more months.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on small fish; including many sand lance and herring off eastern North America; also a few crustaceans; mollusks; rarely insects. ,Usually first breeds at age of 3 years. Nests in colonies; associated with Common Terns in northeast. Early in breeding season; groups fly high; glide down. On ground; birds display with tail raised; neck arched. Male may feed female. Nest site on ground under cover such as grass;  shrubs; or rock ledge; sometimes in abandoned burrow or in open on bare sand. In Florida; some nest on gravel roofs. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow scrape; usually lined with bits of debris. 
Rosss-Goose,Anser rossii,Ducks and Geese,Tundra (summer); marshes; grain fields; ponds. In summer on Arctic tundra; especially flat tundra with mix of grassy areas and low matted thickets of dwarf birch or willow. In migration and winter; shallow lakes; freshwater marshes; flooded stubble fields; other agricultural lands.,Forages mainly by walking on land; or wading or swimming in shallow water. During migration and winter; feeds in flocks; usually with Snow Geese.,4; sometimes 2-6; rarely 1-8. Dull white; becoming nest-stained. Female does all incubating; usually 21-23 days. Young: Leave the nest shortly after hatching; following parents to water. Both parents tend the young; male is most active in defense against predators. Young fledge in 40-45 days.,almost entirely plant material. Diet for most of year is mainly green grasses and sedges. On arrival on breeding grounds; before new growth is available; do much grubbing for roots. In fall migration; feeds more on seeds and grains of wild grasses or cultivated crops. ,First breeding at age of 2 or 3 years. Courtship involves rapid head-dipping by both members of pair. Breeds in colonies; usually associated with colonies of Snow Goose. Nest site is often on island or shore of tundra lake; usually on edge of low thicket. The same site is often used for more than 1 season. Nest is a bulky bowl of twigs; leaves; grass; moss; lined with down. Female builds nest; beginning about the time the first egg is laid; continuing after incubation begins. 
Rosss-Gull,Rhodostethia rosea,Gulls and Terns,Pack ice; northern coasts; tundra. Nests (in Siberia and Manitoba) mainly on wet; boggy tundra and marsh near southern limits of tundra regions; also some on high Arctic tundra farther north. Spends remainder of year at sea; mostly around areas of pack ice; also along Arctic coastlines. Very rare visitor farther south; both along coast and on inland waters.,Forages mostly by flying low over water; dropping to surface and partly submerging; or picking items from surface while hovering. Also feeds while swimming; or while wading or walking along shore. May paddle its feet in water while wading or hovering; perhaps to stir up prey.,2-3. Olive with brown blotches. Incubation is by both parents; probably 21-22 days. Young: After the young are a few days old; parents visit only briefly and infrequently to feed them; nesting colony may look deserted. Age at first flight not well known; probably more than 3 weeks.,Insects; crustaceans; fish. Diet on breeding grounds mostly insects. At sea; feeds on crustaceans; small fish; mollusks; marine worms; may also eat carrion; refuse. ,May nest in loose colonies; often associated with colonies of Arctic Tern. Aggressive nest defense of terns may benefit Ross's Gulls nesting nearby. Courtship displays include two birds facing each other; raising their tails and giving soft calls; also standing side by side; circling each other on foot. Nest site is on an island or hummock in a marshy area; close to water. Nest is a shallow depression; lined with bits of plant material. 
Rosy-faced-Lovebird,Agapornis roseicollis,Lovebirds and Australasian Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Rough-legged-Hawk,Buteo lagopus,Hawks and Eagles,Tundra escarpments; arctic coasts; in winter; open fields; plains; marshes. Spends the winter in open country; including grasslands; coastal prairies and marshes; farmland; dunes. Breeds mostly on tundra; in areas having cliffs for nest sites; some breed along northern edge of coniferous forest zone.,Often hunts by hovering over fields; watching for movement below. Also hunts by watching from a perch; or patrolling low over ground.,Usually 3-5; sometimes 2-6. In some areas; supposedly may lay more eggs in years when rodents are abundant. Eggs pale bluish-white; fading to white; blotched with brown and violet. Incubation is by female; roughly 31 days (male may sometimes sit on eggs briefly). During incubation; male brings food for female. Young: Female remains with young at first; male brings food; female feeds it to young. Later; both parents hunt. Age of young at first flight about 5-6 weeks; and they remain with parents for another 3-5 weeks.,Mostly rodents. On breeding grounds; feeds heavily on lemmings and voles. During high population cycles; lemmings may be more than 80% of summer diet. Also eats many birds. In winter and migration; eats voles; mice; ground squirrels; other small mammals; plus occasionally birds; frogs; insects. May readily feed on carrion in winter. ,In breeding season; members of pair circle together high in air. One may perform sky dance; alternately flapping to high elevation and then diving steeply. Nest site is usually on a narrow ledge or niche in high cliff. Sometimes nests on slopes; atop large rocks; even on level ground. At edge of forest; may nest in top of tree. Nest is a bulky structure of sticks; bones; debris; lined with grasses and twigs. 
Royal-Tern,Thalasseus maximus,Gulls and Terns,Coasts; sandy beaches; salt bays. Favors warm coastal waters; especially those that are shallow and somewhat protected; as in bays; lagoons; estuaries. Also found well offshore at times; and travels freely between islands in the Caribbean. Usually nests on low-lying sandy islands.,Forages mostly by hovering over water and plunging to catch prey just below surface. Sometimes flies low; skimming water with bill; occasionally catches flying fish in the air; or dips to water's surface to pick up floating refuse. May steal food from other birds. Sometimes feeds at night.,One; rarely two. Whitish to brown; blotched with reddish-brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 28-35 days; usually 30-31. Young: Within 2-3 days after hatching; young leaves nest and joins others in group called a "creche."  Both parents bring food; parents and offspring are able to recognize each other by voice; so that adults feed only their own young. Age at first flight about 4-5 weeks. Young remain with parents for up to 8 months or more; migrating south with them.,Fish; crustaceans. Feeds mostly on small fish (up to 4" long; sometimes up to 7") and crustaceans; especially crabs. Eats wide variety of small fish; also shrimp; squid. Soft-shelled blue crabs are major items in diet on Atlantic Coast. ,Usually first breeds at age of 4 years. Nests in colonies. Courtship involves high spiraling flights by two or more birds. On ground; male presents food to female; both birds bow; strut in circles. Nest site is on ground (usually sandy) in the open. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a shallow depression; with or without sparse lining of debris. 
Ruby-crowned-Kinglet,Regulus calendula,Kinglets,Conifers in summer; other trees and brush in winter. Breeds in coniferous forest; including those of spruce; fir; Douglas-fir; and some pine woods. Winters in a wide variety of habitats; mainly in open deciduous woods; also in coniferous and mixed woods; mesquite brush; streamside thickets.,Forages actively at all levels; from treetops to low brush; examining foliage; twigs; and major limbs for foods. Often hovers while taking items from foliage; and sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air. Compared to Golden-crowned Kinglet; does more hovering and flycatching; less hanging on twigs.,7-8; sometimes 4-9. In Pacific Northwest; 9-10 eggs; sometimes 7-12; a remarkably large clutch for small size of bird. Eggs whitish to pale buff; with brown spots often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 13-14 days. Male may feed female during incubation. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 16 days after hatching. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. At all seasons; diet is primarily small insects; the birds concentrating on whatever is most readily available; includes many small beetles; flies; leafhoppers; true bugs; caterpillars; and many others. Also eats spiders and pseudoscorpions; diet includes eggs of insects and spiders. In winter; also eats some berries and seeds. Sometimes takes oozing sap or visits flowers; possibly for nectar. ,In courtship; male may crouch horizontally; fluttering wings and raising red crown feathers while singing. Nest: Usually in spruce; sometimes in other conifer; nest averages about 40' above ground; can be up to 90'; or very low in far northern forest where trees are short. Nest is attached to hanging twigs below a horizontal branch; well protected by foliage above. Female builds deep hanging cup of moss; lichens; bark strips; spiderwebs; twigs; rootlets; and conifer needles; lined with feathers; plant down; animal hair. 
Ruby-throated-Hummingbird,Archilochus colubris,Hummingbirds,Gardens; wood edges. Summers in a variety of semi-open habitats; including open woods; clearings and edges in forest; gardens; city parks. Winters mostly in rather open or dry tropical scrub; not usually in rain forest. Migrants may pause in any open habitat with flowers.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and take them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage. Sometimes takes spiders (or trapped insects) from spider webs.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; 11-16 days. Young: Female feeds the young. Nest stretches as young grow. Age of young at first flight about 20-22 days. Usually 1-2 broods per year; sometimes 3. Female may begin building second nest while still feeding young in the first.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Favors tubular flowers such as those of trumpet vine. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,In courtship display; male flies back and forth in front of female in wide U-shaped "pendulum" arc; making a whirring sound on each dive. Also buzzes back and forth in short passes in front of perched female. Nest site is in a tree or large shrub; 5-50 feet above the ground; usually 10-20 feet. Placed on horizontal branch or one that slopes down from tree; usually well surrounded by leafy cover. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of grasses; plant fibers; spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged with lichens and dead leaves. 
Ruddy-Duck,Oxyura jamaicensis,Ducks and Geese,Fresh marshes; ponds; lakes; in winter; salt bays. Breeds on fresh or alkaline lakes and ponds with extensive marshy borders and with areas of open water. In winter on protected shallow bays and estuaries along coast; also on ice-free lakes and ponds in the interior; including those with little or no marshy border.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled by feet; using its bill to strain food items from mud at the bottom of ponds. Rarely forages by dabbling at the surface.,5-10; typically 8. Whitish; becoming nest-stained; with rough; granular surface; and quite large for size of bird. Ruddies often lay eggs in each others' nests and in those of other ducks and marsh birds. Incubation is by female; 23-26 days. Young: Leave the nest within a day after hatching; are able to swim and dive well immediately. Young are tended by female but feed themselves. Age at first flight about 6 weeks. One brood per year in north; sometimes 2 in south.,Mostly seeds; roots; insects. Feeds on the seeds and roots of plants including pondweeds; sedges; smartweeds; coontail; and grasses. Also eats aquatic insects; mollusks; crustaceans; rarely small fish. Insects and their larvae may be main foods eaten in summer. ,Pairs form after arrival on breeding waters. Courtship displays of male include raising tail over back and bouncing head rapidly so that bill slaps against chest; short rushes across water with much splashing of wings and feet. Nest site is in dense marsh vegetation over shallow water. Nest (built by female) is a woven platform of grasses; cattails; lined with down; a few inches above water and anchored to standing marsh growth. Sometimes built on top of old muskrat house or coot nest. 
Ruddy-Ground-Dove,Columbina talpacoti,Pigeons and Doves,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Ruddy-Quail-Dove,Geotrygon montana,Pigeons and Doves,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Ruddy-Turnstone,Arenaria interpres,Sandpipers,Beaches; mudflats; jetties; rocky shores; in summer; tundra. Mostly coastal in migration and winter; favoring rocky shorelines; rock jetties; or beaches covered with seaweed or debris. May also feed on mudflats or on plowed fields near coast. Nests on open ground in arctic; including wet tundra and dry rocky ridges.,Best known for habit of inserting bill under stones; shells; etc.; and flipping them over to find food underneath. Several birds may work together to overturn a larger object. Often probes under seaweed or debris. Can be a nuisance in tern colonies at times; including on wintering grounds on Pacific islands; where it may puncture and eat the contents of many eggs.,4; sometimes 2-3. Olive-green to olive-buff; blotched with dark brown. Incubation is by both sexes (but female does more); 22-24 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Both parents care for young at first; but male takes greater role; and female usually departs before young are old enough to fly. Male leads young to food at first; but young feed themselves. Age at first flight 19-21 days; usually independent thereafter.,Variable; includes insects; crustaceans; mollusks. In breeding season mostly insects; also spiders; seeds; berries; moss. At other seasons eats crustaceans (including barnacles; crabs; amphipods); mollusks; worms; sea urchins; small fish. Will eat carrion and will eat food scraps thrown out in garbage dumps. Sometimes eats eggs of other birds. ,In courtship; male pursues female; in the air and on the ground. Male may approach female in hunched posture; raising and lowering tail. Nest site is on ground; either in the open or concealed among rocks or under plants. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression with slight lining of leaves. 
Ruff,Calidris pugnax,Sandpipers,Grassy marshes; mudflats; flooded fields. Migrants in North America often are seen on marshes or ponds a short distance inland; on the coast; they favor estuaries; lagoons; mudflats at inlets; salt marshes. Generally not on open sandy beaches.,Forages while walking or wading; by picking up items from surface or probing in water or mud. Sometimes forages actively; running about on open mudflats. May feed by day or night.,4; sometimes 2-3. Olive to green; blotched with brown. Incubation is by female only; 20-23 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Female feeds young at first; but they learn to feed themselves after a few days. Age at first flight about 25-28 days.,Mostly insects and other invertebrates; also seeds. Diet in North America not well known. In Eurasia; eats many insects; especially flies; beetles; caddisflies. Also eats small mollusks; crustaceans; spiders; worms; small fish; frogs. During migration and winter may eat many seeds; sometimes forming major part of diet. ,Has nested once in Alaska; but information here applies to Eurasian birds. Males gather in spring on "leks" and display to attract females. In display; male raises head tufts and neck ruff; flutters wings; may leap in air; many other elaborate postures including bowing; crouching with feathers fluffed up; standing tall. Usually silent during display. Males often fight. Female visits lek; mates with one of the males; male takes no part in caring for eggs or young. Nest site is on ground; well hidden in grass or marsh. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression lined with grasses. 
Ruffed-Grouse,Bonasa umbellus,Pheasants and Grouse,Deciduous and mixed forests; especially those with scattered clearings and dense undergrowth; overgrown pastures.,NA,NA,NA,9-12 pinkish-buff eggs; plain or spotted with dull brown; in a shallow depression lined with leaves and concealed under a bush.
Rufous-Hummingbird,Selasphorus rufus,Hummingbirds,Forest edges; streamsides; mountain meadows. Breeding habitat includes forest edges and clearings; and brushy second growth within the region of northern coast and mountains. Winters mostly in pine-oak woods in Mexico. Migrants occur at all elevations but more commonly in lowlands during spring; in mountain meadows during late summer and fall.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and capture them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage. Also sometimes will take spiders or trapped insects from spider webs.,2; rarely 1-3. White. Incubation is by female only; 15-17 days. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar. Age of young at first flight about 21 days.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Often visits red tubular flowers such as penstemons; red columbines; paintbrush; scarlet sage; gilia; and many others. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Male's courtship display flight traces a steep U or vertical oval; climbing high and then diving steeply; with whining and popping sounds at bottom of dive. Also buzzes back and forth in front of perched female. Male may mate with several females. Nest site is usually well concealed in lower part of coniferous trees; deciduous shrubs; vines. Located 3-30 feet above the ground; usually lower than 15 feet; although nests may be higher later in the season. Old nests may be refurbished and reused. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of grasses; moss; plant down; spider webs; and other soft materials; the outside camouflaged with lichens and moss. 
Rufous-backed-Robin,Turdus rufopalliatus,Thrushes,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Rufous-capped-Warbler,Basileuterus rufifrons,Wood Warblers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Rufous-crowned-Sparrow,Aimophila ruficeps,New World Sparrows,Grassy or rocky slopes with sparse low bushes; open pine-oak woods. Habitat varies in different parts of range; but always in brushy areas. In Southwest; usually in rocky areas of foothills and lower canyons; in understory of pine-oak woods; or in chaparral or coastal scrub. On southern Great Plains; found in rocky outcrops with cover of dense grass and scattered bushes.,Forages mostly while walking or hopping on the ground; but also will feed up in weeds and low bushes. Tends to move slowly; foraging in a limited area. Usually forages in pairs or in family groups.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale bluish-white; unmarked. Incubation is probably by female; but details not well known. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young probably leave the nest after about 8-9 days; before they are able to fly; young may remain with parents for up to several months.,Mostly insects and seeds. Diet varies with season and locality; but tends to eat more insects in summer; more seeds in winter. Major items in diet may include caterpillars; beetle larvae and adults; grasshoppers; ants; and other insects and spiders. Also eats many seeds of grasses and weeds at all seasons; but especially in winter. ,Members of a pair may remain together all year on permanent home range. In spring and summer; male sings to defend nesting territory. Nest site is usually on the ground; typically well hidden at base of bush or grass clump; placed in a slight depression so that rim of nest is near ground level. Occasionally in low shrub; up to 1-3' above ground; especially in eastern part of range. Nest is an open cup made of small twigs; grass; weeds; plant fibers; often with some animal hair in lining. 
Rufous-winged-Sparrow,Peucaea carpalis,New World Sparrows,Tall desert grass; thorn brush. Quite local in our area; favoring areas with good growth of grass and numerous shrubs; especially mesquite and desert hackberry. Avoids areas that have been heavily grazed; but may occur in suburban areas where houses are scattered and good vegetation remains.,Forages mostly while hopping about on the ground. Also forages up in low bushes; especially in summer. Picks up items from ground or from stems of plants; and occasionally makes short flights to catch insects in mid-air. Usually forages in pairs or family groups; sometimes loosely associated with Black-throated Sparrows.,Usually 4; sometimes 2-3. A century ago; may have typically laid clutches of 4-5 in Arizona. Eggs pale bluish white; unmarked. Incubation is apparently by female only; length of incubation period not well known. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 8-9 days after hatching. 1 brood per year; or 2 in years with good rains.,Mostly insects and seeds. Summer diet is mostly insects; especially caterpillars and grasshoppers; also many other insects and some spiders. Eats more seeds at other seasons; especially those of grasses and weeds; and winter diet may be almost entirely seeds. ,Members of a pair may remain together on territory at all seasons. Nesting in Arizona is usually in late summer; after beginning of rainy season; in wet years; may also nest in spring. Male defends nesting territory by singing from a raised perch. Nest site is usually in low shrub or cactus; from a few inches to 7' above the ground; often placed in desert hackberry or mesquite; sometimes in cholla or prickly pear cactus. Nest (probably built by female only) is a deep open cup made of dry weeds; grass; and small twigs; lined with fine grass and often with animal hair. 
Rustic-Bunting,Emberiza rustica,Old World Buntings,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Rusty-Blackbird,Euphagus carolinus,Blackbirds and Orioles,River groves; wooded swamps; muskeg in summer. Breeds in the muskeg region; in wet northern coniferous forest with many lakes and bogs. During migration and winter; favors areas with trees near water; as in wooded swamps and riverside forest; will also forage in open fields and cattle feedlots with other blackbirds.,Forages mostly by walking on wet ground or wading in shallow water. May be solitary or in flocks. May join flocks of other blackbirds and feed with them in dry fields.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Pale blue-green; spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by female only; probably about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 11-14 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and seeds. Majority of annual diet is insects; including many aquatic insects such as caddisflies; mayflies; dragonflies; and water beetles; plus land insects such as grasshoppers and others. Also eats snails; crustaceans; small fish; small salamanders. Eats many seeds and waste grain; especially in winter; also a few berries. ,Sometimes nests in small; loose colonies; but more typically in isolated pairs. Male gives harsh; grating song in spring; to defend nesting territory or to attract a mate. Nest site is in dense cover; usually in conifer or in shrubs above the water; placed very low; typically only a few feet above water or ground; but can be up to 20' high in coniferous tree. Nest (built by female) is a bulky open cup of twigs and grass; often with foundation of Usnea lichens; the inner bowl shaped of mudlike decaying plant material from the forest floor; lined with fine grass. 
Sabines-Gull,Xema sabini,Gulls and Terns,Ocean; nests on tundra. During summer on low; marshy tundra close to coast; especially areas with many ponds and shallow tidal flats. In migration and winter mostly at sea; typically a few miles offshore over continental shelf; concentrates in winter where there are upwellings of cold water near coastlines south of the Equator.,During migration and winter (mostly at sea); forages by dipping to surface of water in flight; or by picking up items near surface while swimming. During summer; also does much feeding while walking on tidal flats or in marshes. In shallow water may spin in circles; stirring up items from bottom.,2; sometimes 1-3. Olive with darker olive-brown spots. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-25 days. Parents may defend nest by dive-bombing intruders; or may try to lead predators away with distraction display. Young: Shortly after young hatch; parents lead them to area near water; young mostly feed themselves. Age at first flight unknown.,Insects; fish; crustaceans. Diet in summer mostly insects and aquatic insect larvae; also some crustaceans; mollusks; marine worms; small fish. Winter diet not well known; includes small fish; crustaceans. ,Male on territory lures female by giving long call; arching neck; bowing. In courtship; male may feed female. Nest site is on open ground; in small colony; typically close to water. Usually located in or near a colony of Arctic Terns. Nest is a shallow depression; either unlined or with a lining of seaweed; moss; feathers. 
Sage-Thrasher,Oreoscoptes montanus,Mockingbirds and Thrashers,Sagebrush; brushy slopes; mesas; in winter; also deserts. Breeds almost entirely in sagebrush areas; either in wide-open flats or where sagelands meet open pinyon-juniper woods. Rarely breeds in other brushy habitats. More widespread in migration and winter; occurring in grassland with scattered shrubs; desert; pinyon-juniper woods; and other semi-open areas.,Does much of its foraging on the ground; running about rapidly on open ground in scrubby territory. Perches in shrubs and low trees to feed on berries.,3-5; sometimes more or fewer. Deep greenish blue with brown spots concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by both parents; about 13-17 days. Brown-headed Cowbirds sometimes lay eggs in nest; but cowbird eggs are rejected and tossed out by the adult thrashers. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave nest about 11-14 days after hatching. Adults may raise 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Especially in summer; feeds on grasshoppers; beetles; caterpillars; true bugs; wasps; and other insects; plus some spiders. Berries and wild fruits are eaten especially in winter; but the birds may concentrate at any season to feed on gooseberries; wild currants; mistletoe berries; juniper berries; and others; sometimes including cultivated fruits. ,Male sings to defend breeding territory. May also perform flight display; singing while flying in low zigzag over brush; then alighting and holding the wings raised and fluttering for a moment. Nest site is in sagebrush or other low bush such as greasewood; saltbush; or rabbitbrush; sometimes low in juniper or on ground. Nest (thought to be built by both sexes) is a bulky cup of twigs; lined with fine rootlets; grass; and animal hair. 
Sagebrush-Sparrow,Artemisiospiza nevadensis,New World Sparrows,Dry brushy foothills; chaparral; sage; in winter; also deserts. Breeds in brushy open country. In northern and eastern part of range; mainly in stands of big sagebrush; farther southwest; mainly in saltbush; chamise; and other low shrubs of arid flats. Winters in dry chaparral; open flats with scattered brush; deserts. ,Forages mostly on the ground; picking up items from the soil or from plant stems; sometimes scratching with its feet. Also does some feeding up in low bushes. When not nesting; often forages in small flocks.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Bluish white to pale blue; variably spotted or blotched with brown; gray; and black. Incubation lasts about 13-16 days.,Mostly seeds and insects. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including grasshoppers; beetles; true bugs; leafhoppers; ants; and many others; also spiders. Also eats many seeds of weeds; grasses; and shrubs. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male returns to same nesting territory each year; defends it by singing from a raised perch. Nest site is usually in low shrub (usually in sagebrush or saltbush; depending on habitat); less than 4' above the ground. Sometimes placed on the ground under a shrub. Nest is a bulky open cup; made of twigs; sticks; lined with fine dry grass; weeds; sometimes animal hair.
Saltmarsh-Sparrow,Ammospiza caudacuta,New World Sparrows,Coastal marshes. Found mostly in salt marshes with sedges; rushes; cordgrass; saltgrass; and other typical plants; sometimes in fresh marshes or fields adjacent to coast.,Forages while walking on the ground or while climbing in marsh plants. Picks items from surface of plants; ground; or water; and sometimes probes in mud.,3-5; sometimes 2-6. Greenish white to pale blue-green; heavily dotted with reddish-brown. Incubation is by female only; 11-12 days. Young: Nestlings are fed by female alone. Young leave nest about 8-11 days after hatching; may remain with female for another 2-3 weeks. Often 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and other invertebrates; some seeds. Animal matter makes up much of winter diet and almost all of summer diet. Feeds on insects (including grasshoppers; beetles; caterpillars; ants; wasps; others); spiders; amphipods; small crabs and snails; marine worms; other invertebrates. Also eats seeds of grasses and other marsh plants; especially in fall and winter. ,Unusual breeding system. Males do not defend territories; but move around large area of marsh; singing to attract females. Both sexes are promiscuous; and no pairs are formed; males take no part in caring for the eggs or young. Nest site is in marsh; usually where standing plants are mixed with much dead grass remaining from preceding seasons. Nests usually placed just above normal high tide mark; many nests are destroyed by extreme tides. Nest (built by female) is a bulky open cup of grass; sometimes partially domed over; with lining of finer grass. 
Sanderling,Calidris alba,Sandpipers,Outer beaches; tideflats; lake shores; when nesting; stony tundra. At most seasons found on sandy beaches washed by waves. Sometimes on rocky shorelines; less often on mudflats. Typically coastal; but a few stop over on lake shores inland. In breeding season; mostly far above Arctic Circle on rather dry; rocky tundra with growth of moss; lichens; low plants; generally close to lakes or ponds.,Chases the waves mostly to find sand crabs; which lie buried in intertidal zone and are easiest to spot just after a wave retreats. Sanderlings also probe in sand and mud for other creatures; and move rapidly while picking items from surface.,4; sometimes 3. Olive-green to pale brown; sparsely spotted with brown and black. Incubation is by both sexes; 24-31 days. Sometimes female lays 2 clutches in separate nests and male incubates one set; female the other. At other times; female may have two mates; leaving each male to care for a set of eggs and young; while female departs. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching; are tended by one or both parents. If both parents are present at first; female may leave within a few days. Young feed themselves. Age at first flight about 17 days.,Mostly sand crabs and other invertebrates. Feeds on a wide variety of small creatures on beach; including sand crabs; amphipods; isopods; insects; marine worms; small mollusks; also may eat some carrion. Wintering birds on southern coasts may eat corn chips and other junk food left by people. In spring; may feed heavily on eggs of horseshoe crab. On tundra; feeds mostly on flies and other insects; also some seeds; algae; and leaves. ,In breeding season; unmated male performs low display flight; alternately fluttering and gliding; while giving harsh chirring song. On ground; male runs up to female with feathers ruffled; head hunched down on shoulders. Nest site is on ground; usually in open and rather barren spot which may be higher than surroundings. Nest is shallow scrape; often lined with small leaves. 
Sandhill-Crane,Antigone canadensis,Cranes,Prairies; fields; marshes; tundra. Habitat varies with region; but usually nests around marshes or bogs; either in open grassland or surrounded by forest. Northernmost birds nest on marshy tundra. In migration and winter; often around open prairie; agricultural fields; river valleys.,See family introduction. Except in breeding season; forages in flocks.,Usually 2; sometimes 1; rarely 3. Variably pale olive to buff; marked with brown or gray. Incubation is by both sexes; 29-32 days. Female does more of incubating (typically all night; part of day). Young: Leave the nest within a day after hatching; follow parents in marsh. Both parents feed young at first; but young gradually learn to feed themselves. Age at first flight about 65-75 days. Young remain with parents for 9-10 months; accompanying them in migration.,Omnivorous. Diet varies widely with location and season. Major food items include insects; roots of aquatic plants; also eat rodents; snails; frogs; lizards; snakes; nestling birds; berries; seeds. May eat large quantities of cultivated grains when available. ,Courtship includes elaborate "dance;" with birds spreading wings; leaping in air while calling. Nest site is among marsh vegetation in shallow water (sometimes up to 3' deep); sometimes on dry ground close to water. Nest (built by both sexes) is mound of plant material pulled up from around site; nest may be built up from bottom or may be floating; anchored to standing plants. 
Sandwich-Tern,Thalasseus sandvicensis,Gulls and Terns,Coastal waters; jetties; beaches. Favors warm waters near coastlines; often fairly shallow areas such as bays and estuaries near extensive beaches; mudflats. Sometimes forages farther out to sea. Nests on sandy islands; beaches; sandbars; in coastal lagoons or offshore.,Forages by plunging headfirst into water from flight (often hovering first); and emerging immediately with fish held in bill. Sometimes catches insects in flight.,1-2; rarely 3. Pale cream; blotched with black; brown; gray. Incubation is by both parents; 21-29 days. Young: If colony subject to disturbance; young may leave nest after a few days and gather in group (called "creche") with others. Young bird recognizes its own parents by voice; comes out of creche to be fed when they approach. Age at first flight about 28-32 days; young may remain with parents another 4 months.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on smaller fish; such as sand lance and mullet; also eats shrimp; squid; marine worms; and many insects. ,Usually first breeds at age of 3-4 years. Nests in colonies; very often associated with Royal Terns. Early in courtship; high spiraling flight with long descending glides. On ground; male feeds fish to female; both birds may point bills up; droop wings; turn heads from side to side. Nest site is on ground in open spot. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow scrape; sometimes lined with bits of debris. 
Savannah-Sparrow,Passerculus sandwichensis,New World Sparrows,Open fields; meadows; salt marshes; prairies; dunes; shores. Over most of range; found in open meadows; pastures; edges of marshes; alfalfa fields; pastures; also tundra in summer; shores and weedy vacant lots in winter. Northeastern "Ipswich" Savannah Sparrow lives on grassy coastal dunes; southwestern "Belding's" and "Large-billed" races inhabit salt marshes.,Does most foraging while walking or running on the ground; also sometimes forages in shrubs or low trees. Sometimes makes short flights to catch insects in mid-air; and occasionally scratches in soil or leaf-litter to find food. Except when nesting; often forages in small; loose flocks.,2-6; typically 4; tends to lay more eggs in the north. Eggs whitish to pale tan or greenish; with brown markings usually concentrated at larger end. Young: Both parents bring food to the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 8-11 days after hatching (average timing varies among different populations). 1 or 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including beetles; grasshoppers; caterpillars; flies; and others; plus spiders. Coastal populations will also consume tiny crustaceans and mollusks. Also eats many seeds; mainly of grasses and weeds; and some berries. Young are fed mostly insects. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory and to attract a mate. In interactions with rivals or with mate; male performs a flight display; with tail raised and feet dangling as he flutters slowly over the grass. In some regions; males may have more than one mate. Nest site is on ground; usually well hidden among grass or weeds. Usually placed under matted dead plants or under overhanging grass; so that nest can only be approached by a "tunnel" from one side. Nest (built by female) is open cup made of grass; lined with finer grass. 
Says-Phoebe,Sayornis saya,Tyrant Flycatchers,Scrub; canyons; ranches. Found in open or semi-open terrain; often in dry country; avoiding forested areas. Often in farmland; savannah; or prairie in south; dry upland tundra in northern part of range. Unlike the other two phoebes; has no special attachment to vicinity of water.,Forages by perching on low shrub or rock and darting out to capture insects. May catch its food in mid-air; or take it from low foliage or from ground. Also often hovers low over fields until prey is spotted; then drops to ground to capture it. Indigestible parts of insects are coughed up as pellets.,4; sometimes 3-7. White; some (thought to be the last laid) may have small brown or reddish spots. Incubation is by female only; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents bring food to nestlings. Young leave nest about 14-16 days after hatching. 1-2 broods per year; sometimes 3 in the south.,Almost entirely insects. Often feeds heavily on wild bees; wasps; winged ants. Other insects in diet include beetles; moths; grasshoppers; crickets; and dragonflies. Also eats spiders and millipedes; and occasionally eats berries. ,Males are thought to arrive on breeding grounds before females. Male sings to defend nesting territory; usually from exposed perch; sometimes in flight-song display. Nest site varies: on rocky ledge or crevices in cliffs or caves; in wells or mine shafts; under bridges or eaves; occasionally in natural tree cavity or hole in bank. May take over old swallow nest. Nest (probably built by female; but details not well known) is a flat open cup made of grass; weeds; moss; spiderwebs; wool; and other materials. Unlike other phoebes; usually uses no mud in nest. 
Scaled-Quail,Callipepla squamata,New World Quail,Grasslands; brush; arid country. Prime habitat is flat open country or rolling hills; supporting a mix of grasses with annual weeds; with scattered shrubs for additional cover and shade. Also found where grassland grades into other open habitat types such as desert; juniper slopes; dry brush.,Forages in coveys at most seasons; in pairs or singly during early part of breeding season.,Usually about 12; sometimes 5-16 or more. Whitish; speckled with light brown. Incubation is mostly by female; rarely by male; about 22-23 days. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching. Both parents tend young; with male often standing guard on higher perch while female and young feed on the ground. Young feed themselves. Development of young and age at first flight not well known. One brood per year; rarely two.,Seeds; insects. Eats seeds of many annual and perennial weeds (such as snakeweed; Russian thistle; broomweed); seeds of woody plants (such as mesquite); seems to eat relatively few grass seeds; but perhaps more than some quail. Also feeds on green leaves; berries. Eats more insects than most quail; especially in spring and summer. ,In breeding season; unmated males perch on tops of shrubs; rocks; or posts; and give hoarse single-noted call to defend territory and attract females. Nest site is on ground; usually well hidden under shrub; tumbleweed; cactus; or other cover. Nest (probably built by female) is shallow depression lined with grass and leaves; with tuft of standing grass arched over it. 
Scaly-breasted-Munia,Lonchura punctulata,Waxbills,Brushy; overgrown fields; woodland edges; and other dense low growth; often near water.,Forages in flocks; usually in dense low growth or on the ground. May climb along grass stems to reach seed heads. ,3-5 eggs; white; unmarked. Incubation is by both sexes; about 14 days. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave the nest after about 18 days.,Mostly seeds; also some berries and insects. ,NA
Scarlet-Tanager,Piranga olivacea,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Forests and shade trees (especially oaks). Breeds mostly in deciduous forest; mainly where oaks are common but also in maple; beech; and other trees; sometimes in mixed pine-oak woods; and occasionally in coniferous woods dominated by pine or hemlock. Winters in tropical rain forest in lowlands just east of the Andes.,Forages mostly in tall trees (especially oaks); seeking insects rather deliberately among the foliage. May hover momentarily while taking an item; and sometimes flies out to catch insects in mid-air. Also forages in low shrubs or on the ground; especially in cold weather.,2-5; usually 4. Pale blue-green; with spots of brown or reddish-brown often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings; although the male may do less of the feeding in some cases. Young leave the nest about 9-15 days after hatching; are tended by parents (or by female only) for about 2 more weeks.,Mostly insects; some berries. In summer; feeds mainly on insects; including caterpillars; moths; beetles; wasps; bees; aphids; and many others; also some spiders; snails; worms; millipedes. Also eats wild fruits and berries; including those of mulberry; elder; sumac; and others. Winter diet poorly known. ,In courtship; male hops about on branches below perched female; with wings drooped and tail partly spread; showing off contrast between red back and black wings and tail. Nest site is in tree (usually deciduous); typically 20-30' above ground; sometimes lower or much higher. Placed on horizontal branch; usually well out from the trunk. Nest (built by female) is a shallow open cup of twigs; weeds; grass; lined with fine grass and rootlets. 
Scissor-tailed-Flycatcher,Tyrannus forficatus,Tyrant Flycatchers,Semi-open country; ranches; farms; roadsides. Favors grassland or farmland with scattered trees or isolated groves. May breed in open grassland with no trees in some areas; where utility poles provide artificial nest sites. Winters in open or semi-open country in the tropics.,Forages mostly by watching from a perch; flying out to catch insects; then returning to perch to eat them. May take insects in mid-air; or may pick them from foliage or from ground while hovering; very agile and maneuverable in flight.,3-5; rarely 6. Whitish; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is by female; about 14-17 days. Young: Both parents bring food to nestlings. Young leave the nest about 14-16 days after hatching.,Insects. Feeds mostly on insects; including many grasshoppers; also beetles; wasps; bees; true bugs; flies; caterpillars; moths; and others. Also eats some spiders. Small numbers of berries and wild fruits are eaten occasionally. ,Male has spectacular courtship display; sharply rising and descending in flight; its long tail streamers opening and closing; while the bird gives sharp calls. May perform backwards somersaults in the air. Nest site is usually in a tree or tall shrub; placed on a horizontal limb or less often in a vertical fork; usually 7-30' above the ground. Often also places nest where wires attach to utility poles; or on other artificial sites such as towers or bridge supports. Nest (built by female) is a ragged open cup of twigs; weeds; rootlets; and grass; lined with finer materials such as hair and plant down. 
Scotts-Oriole,Icterus parisorum,Blackbirds and Orioles,Dry woods and scrub in desert mountains; yuccas; Joshua-trees; pinyons. Breeds in semi-arid zones of Southwest in oak zones of lower canyons; open woods of juniper and pinyon pine; stands of Joshua-trees; grassland with many yuccas; palm oases. Avoids true desert.,Forages rather slowly and quietly in treetops; clambering along branches as it searches for insects. Regularly visits flowers; probing deeply in the blossoms for nectar.,2-4; usually 3. Pale bluish white; with dots and lines of brown; gray; and black concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 2 weeks after hatching. 1 or 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects; some berries and nectar. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including grasshoppers; beetles; caterpillars; and many others. Also eats berries and fruit; including cactus fruit; may feed on cultivated fruit at times. Also feeds on nectar; and will take sugar-water from feeders. ,Males arrive on breeding grounds a few days before females; and sing frequently to establish nesting territory. Nest: Often placed in yucca; or in Joshua-tree (which is a tall; branched type of yucca). Also may be in palm or in tree such as sycamore; oak; or pine. Usually 4-20' above ground. Nest in tree may be hidden in clump of mistletoe. Nest (probably built by female) is a hanging basket; suspended by its edges; not as deep as the nests of some orioles; woven of grasses; yucca fibers; other plant fibers; lined with fine grass; hair; and plant down. 
Scrippss-Murrelet,Synthliboramphus scrippsi,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; islands. Generally in relatively warm waters and well offshore. May be close to nesting islands but almost never close to mainland; may go far out beyond continental shelf. Nests on islands with steep cliffs; rocky slopes; dense cover of bushes.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled by wings. Pairs or family groups may forage together. ,2; rarely 1. Large for size of bird; pale blue to dull green; with few or many brown spots; sometimes solid brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 27-44 days. ,Poorly known. Probably eats mostly small crustaceans and other marine invertebrates. Thought not to be much of a fish eater. ,Breeds on islands in small colonies. Birds typically have same mate and same nest site each year. Nest site is in rock crevice; under dense bush; under debris; or in abandoned burrow of other species; no nest built
Seaside-Sparrow,Ammospiza maritima,New World Sparrows,Salt marshes. Lives in tidal marshes along coast; favoring areas with dense tall growth above level of highest tides and with openings and edges for foraging. Habitats often feature spartina; rushes; and saltgrass. In Florida; extinct "Dusky" Seaside Sparrow nested in fresh or brackish marsh in some areas; and "Cape Sable" form still does so in parts of extreme southern Florida.,Forages on the ground at edge of water; and in low growth such as cordgrass and salicornia. May probe in mud or pick items from surface of vegetation.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Bluish white to very pale gray; with blotches of brown often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female only; about 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-11 days after hatching; but unable to fly well for at least another week. Parents may feed young for 2-3 weeks after they fledge. 1-2 broods per year.,Mostly insects; other invertebrates; and seeds. Diet varies with season and location; but major items include grasshoppers; beetles; caterpillars; spiders; small crabs; snails; amphipods; and marine worms. Also eats many seeds; especially in fall and winter; including those of cordgrass and saltbush. ,During courtship; male follows female; frequently raising his wings and singing. In non-migratory southern populations; members of pair may remain together on nesting territory all year. Nest site is in low marsh vegetation; a few inches above level of highest tides. Nest (built by female alone) is an open cup of grass; lined with finer grasses. Usually has at least a partial cover or canopy built by bird or provided by surrounding plants. 
Sedge-Wren,Cistothorus platensis,Wrens,Grassy marshes; sedgy meadows. Breeds mostly in damp meadows of grass or sedges; also in lush hayfields and other fields with dense low growth and scattered bushes. Generally not in deep-water marsh; but may be along their grassy edges. Winters in rank weedy meadows; coastal prairies.,Forages very low in dense low growth of sedges and grass; creeping about and searching for insects among the vegetation and on the ground. May sometimes make short flights to catch insects in the air.,4-8. White; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed young but female may do more. Young leave nest about 12-14 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; but feeds on a wide variety of insects including true bugs; beetles; moths; caterpillars; grasshoppers; ants; flies; and many others. Also eats many spiders. ,Very erratic in its choice of nesting territory; little colonies springing up one year and vacated the next. One male may have more than one mate. Adults often puncture the eggs of other birds nesting nearby (including those of other Sedge Wrens). Nest: Male may build several incomplete "dummy" nests that are never used. Real nest is built very low among standing grass or sedges in wet meadow; up to 3' above the ground; usually hard to find. Nest is a round globular ball woven of sedges and grasses; with a small entrance on the side. The inside is lined with fine grass; plant down; animal hair; feathers. 
Semipalmated-Plover,Charadrius semipalmatus,Plovers,Shores; tideflats. Favors very open habitats on migration; including broad mudflats; sandy beaches; lake shores; pools in salt marsh; sometimes in flooded fields or even plowed fields with other shorebirds. Tends to avoid flats overgrown with too much marsh vegetation. Breeds in the north; mostly on open flats of sand or gravel near water.,Typically they run a few steps and then pause; then run again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible. Will sometimes hold one foot forward and shuffle it rapidly over the surface of sand or mud; as if to startle small creatures into moving.,4; rarely 3. Olive-buff to olive-brown; blotched with black and brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 23-25 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young; but young find all their own food. Age at first flight about 23-31 days.,Insects; crustaceans; worms. Diet varies with season and location. In breeding season and during migration inland; may feed mostly on insects; including flies and their larvae; also earthworms. On coast; eats many marine worms; crustaceans; small mollusks. ,In breeding season; male displays over territory by flying in wide circles with slow; exaggerated wingbeats; calling repeatedly. On ground; male may display by crouching with tail spread; wings open; and feathers fluffed up; while he gives calls with an excited sound. Nest site is on ground; amid sparse plant growth or on bare open gravel or sand; sometimes placed close to large rock or other landmark. Nest is shallow scrape in ground; sometimes lined with small leaves; other debris. 
Semipalmated-Sandpiper,Calidris pusilla,Sandpipers,Beaches; mudflats; tundra in summer. During migration along coast found on mudflats in intertidal zone; shallow estuaries and inlets; beaches. Inland; occurs on edges of lakes and marshes next to very shallow water. Nests on low arctic tundra; near water.,Forages mostly by walking on wet mud; looking for prey; sometimes probes in mud with bill. In coastal areas; does most feeding while tide is falling or at low tide. May forage at night.,4; sometimes 3. Variable in color; whitish to olive-buff; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is by both parents; usually 20 days. Young: Downy young leave nest within hours after hatching. Young are tended by both parents at first; but female usually deserts them within a few days. Male remains with young until they are about old enough to fly; but young feed themselves. Young can make short flights at about 2 weeks after hatching; can fly fairly well at 16-19 days; when not quite full-grown.,Mostly tiny aquatic insects and crustaceans. Diet varies with season and place. In breeding season eats mostly insects; especially flies and their larvae; also some spiders; snails; seeds. During migration; feeds on a wide variety of small crustaceans that live in shallow water or wet mud; also many insects; small mollusks; worms. ,Male defends territory with display flight; fluttering wings and singing a sputtering trill (sounds like a tiny outboard motor). Females are attracted by song; male and female may chase each other around territory. Nest site is on ground; often at top of low mound or on island; under small shrub. Nest is shallow depression lined with leaves; grass; moss. Male makes potential nest scrapes; female chooses one and adds nest material. 
Sharp-shinned-Hawk,Accipiter striatus,Hawks and Eagles,Mixed or coniferous forests; open deciduous woodlands; thickets; edges. Usually nests in groves of coniferous trees in mixed woods; sometimes in dense deciduous trees or in pure coniferous forest with brush or clearings nearby. In winter found in any kind of forest or brushy area; but tends to avoid open country.,Hunts mostly by perching inside foliage and waiting for small birds to approach; or by approaching stealthily through dense cover; then bursting forth with incredibly swift flight to capture prey in its talons. Sometimes hunts by flying rapidly among the trees or low over the ground; threading its way around obstacles; taking prey by sudden surprise.,Usually 4-5; sometimes 3; rarely 1-6. Bluish-white fading to white; blotched and washed with brown. Incubation is mostly by female; 30-35 days. Male brings food to female on nest; and may sit on eggs while she is eating. Young: Female remains near young for first 1-2 weeks after they hatch; male brings food; female feeds it to nestlings. Young may move out of nest onto nearby branches after about 3-4 weeks; can fly at about 5-6 weeks.,Mostly small birds. Feeds mostly on birds of about sparrow size up to robin size; sometimes up to the size of quail. Also eats small numbers of rodents; bats; squirrels; lizards; frogs; snakes; large insects. ,In courtship; pairs may circle above the forest; calling; fluffy white under tail coverts may be spread out to side during some displays. Male may fly high and dive steeply into woods. Nest site is very well concealed; usually in a dense conifer (such as spruce or fir) within forest or thick grove; usually 20-60' above ground; but can be lower or higher in suitably dense cover. Sometimes builds on top of old nest of squirrel or crow. Nest is a platform of sticks; lined with bark strips; twigs; grass. Both sexes bring nest material; female may do most of building. 
Sharp-tailed-Grouse,Tympanuchus phasianellus,Pheasants and Grouse,Prairie; brushy groves; forest edges; open burns in coniferous forest. Prime habitat includes a mixture of open prairie with groves of deciduous trees or shrubs; such as aspen; birch; willow. Shifts habitat with season; occupying more open grasslands in summer; groves of trees and shrubs in winter.,Forages mostly on ground in summer; mostly in trees and shrubs in winter.,5-17; typically about 12. Olive-buff to pale brown; usually speckled with various browns. Incubation is by female only; about 23-24 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Female tends young and leads them to feeding areas; but young feed themselves. Young can make short flights at age of 1-2 weeks; but are not full-grown for several more weeks.,Mostly seeds; buds; leaves. Mostly vegetarian for most of year. In winter; when food on ground is mostly buried by snow; feeds heavily on buds of trees and shrubs. In spring; eats leaves; green shoots; large numbers of flowers. Varied diet in fall; with seeds; berries; leaves; waste grains. Insects eaten mainly in summer (especially by young birds); including many grasshoppers. ,In early mornings in spring; males gather on display ground. Male points tail up; spreads wings; holds head low; stamps feet rapidly while moving forward or in circles. Male inflates neck sacs; then deflates them with hollow cooing sound; also rattles tail feathers. Female visits display grounds; mates with one of the males. Nest site is on ground; under shrub or thick clump of grass. Nest (built by female) is a shallow depression with a sparse lining of grass; leaves; ferns. 
Sharp-tailed-Sandpiper,Calidris acuminata,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Shiny-Cowbird,Molothrus bonariensis,Blackbirds and Orioles,Semi-open country. In North America; has been found mostly near the coast; often foraging on extensive lawns. In the tropics; found in any kind of open or semi-open terrain; mostly in the lowlands.,Forages mostly by walking on the ground in open areas. Often forages in small flocks; and may associate with other kinds of cowbirds or other blackbirds. In the tropics; will feed in association with horses or cattle in pastures.,Quite variable in color: may be unmarked white; or may have gray dots; large red spots; dark lines; brown blotches; or rarely can be all dark red. Number of eggs laid by a female in one season is unknown; but may be many. Female sometimes punctures eggs already in a nest before she lays her own. In South America; parasitizes nests of many species. May specialize in other areas: in Puerto Rico; mostly parasitizes Yellow-shouldered Blackbird. Young: Cowbird nestling is fed by "host" parents and develops rapidly; probably leaving nest after about 10-12 days.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet in North America has not been studied. In the tropics; feeds on insects and other arthropods; and many seeds. ,A brood parasite; never raising its own young. Early in breeding season; males sing to attract females. A male singing to a female on the ground may take off and fly in a wide circle around her with fluttering wingbeats. Nest: Builds no nest of its own; lays its eggs in nests of other birds. 
Short-billed-Dowitcher,Limnodromus griseus,Sandpipers,Mudflats; tidal marshes; pond edges. Migrants and wintering birds favor coastal habitats; especially tidal flats on protected estuaries and bays; also lagoons; salt marshes; sometimes sandy beaches. Migrants also stop inland on freshwater ponds with muddy margins. Breeds in far north; mostly in open bogs; marshes; and edges of lakes within coniferous forest zone.,Typically forages by wading in shallow water (sometimes walking on wet mud); probing deeply in the mud with its bill. Usually deliberate in its feeding; standing in one spot or moving forward slowly.,4; sometimes 3. Olive-buff to brown; marked with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; about 21 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Roles of parents in caring for young not well known; but reportedly female departs; leaving male to tend the chicks. Young find all their own food. Their development and age at first flight are not well known.,Small aquatic invertebrates. Diet probably varies with season. Eats many insects and their larvae; especially on breeding grounds. In migration and winter also eats mollusks; marine worms; crustaceans. At times; may feed heavily on seeds of grasses; bulrushes; pondweeds; other plants. In spring; also feeds on eggs of horseshoe crab. ,Much of nesting area is far inland; generally south and east of the breeding range of Long-billed Dowitcher. Nest site is on ground in bog; forest clearing; or edge of tundra; often near water. Nest is a shallow depression in moss or in a clump of grass; lined with small twigs; leaves; fine grasses. 
Short-eared-Owl,Asio flammeus,Superb Owls,Prairies; marshes; dunes; tundra. Found in open country supporting high numbers of small rodents. Nests most commonly on tundra; inland and coastal prairies; extensive marshes; farmland. In winter also found in stubble fields; small meadows; coastal dunes; shrubby areas.,Hunts by flying low over the ground; often hovering before dropping on prey. Reportedly finds prey mostly by sound but also by sight. May hunt by day; especially in far north; but mostly active at dawn and dusk.,3-11; usually 6-8. White; becoming stained in nest. Incubation is apparently by female only; 24-37 days. Male brings food to female during incubation period. Young: Male brings food for young; gives it to female; who actually feeds the young (and broods them in cold weather). If nest is threatened; adults may fly at intruder and make loud wing-clap; or sit on ground with feathers ruffed up; wings spread and tilted forward; to look as large as possible. Young may leave nest on foot after 12-18 days; can fly at 27-36 days.,Mostly rodents. Feeds mainly on voles; also other rodents such as lemmings; deer mice; pocket mice. Also eats shrews; rabbits; gophers; rarely bats; muskrats. Eats birds; especially in coastal regions. ,In courtship; male spirals up into the air; hovers while giving series of short rapid hoots; then dives; clapping the wings together loudly under its body. Nest site is on dry ground; often on a raised hummock or ridge; especially in marshy country. Usually among tall grass or under a shrub. Very rarely above ground. Nest (built by female) is a depression in soil; lined with grass and feathers. 
Short-tailed-Albatross,Phoebastria albatrus,Albatrosses,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Short-tailed-Hawk,Buteo brachyurus,Hawks and Eagles,Pines; wood edges; cypress swamps; mangroves. Main feature of habitat in Florida is presence of open country next to woodland. Trees involved may be pines; cypress; mangroves; or mixed swamp forest; but must have large expanses of open prairie; farmland; or marsh nearby. In tropics; found in similarly semi-open country; in both lowlands and mountains.,Searches for prey mainly in flight; rarely from a perch. Often appears to hang motionless in the air; or glides very slowly into the wind. Dives steeply after prey is spotted. Mostly attempts to catch birds perched in tops of trees or shrubs.,2; sometimes 1-3. White to pale bluish white; sometimes with brown spots. Incubation is apparently only by female; about 34 days. Male brings food to female during incubation period. Young: Female remains with young most of the time while they are small; male brings food; and female feeds it to young. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Mostly small birds. In Florida; eats birds ranging in size from small songbirds up to Mourning Dove and Sharp-shinned Hawk. Occasional items in diet (in Florida and elsewhere) include snakes; lizards; tree frogs; rodents; insects. ,Breeding behavior not well known; has been studied mostly in Florida; not much in wide tropical range. In spring; male displays over nesting territory with aerial acrobatics; alternately climbing and swooping; flying in high circles; diving headfirst. Nest site is in tree; especially pine or cypress; usually higher than 25' and often near top of tree but under canopy of foliage. Nest is bulky platform of sticks; twigs; Spanish moss; often with leafy green branches added for lining. Male brings most material; female builds nest. 
Short-tailed-Shearwater,Ardenna tenuirostris,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Concentrations at sea are over continental shelf and around upwellings in cool waters. Breeds on islands close to shore and locally on Australian mainland; where grass and shrubs cover soil soft enough for excavating nesting burrows.,Forages mostly by diving from surface of water or by plunging from a few feet above surface; swimming underwater by rowing with wings; may dive as deep as 60 feet below surface. Sometimes forages in association with whales or dolphins.,One. White. Incubation is by both sexes; 52-55 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; visiting at night; feeding by regurgitation. Feeding visits become less frequent as chick matures. Adults then abandon young; and it goes to sea 82-108 days after hatching.,Mostly fish; crustaceans; squid. Diet varies with region; but may include many small fish; crustaceans; including amphipods and euphausiid shrimp; small octopus and squid. Also some marine worms; jellyfish; insects; other items. ,Breeds only around southern and eastern Australia. Nesting season extends from September to April. First breeds at age of 5-8 years. Nests in colonies on islands and locally on mainland; with most activity in colony at night. Nest:  Sites are in burrows dug in soil under grass or scrub; both sexes help to excavate burrow; and same site may be used for several years. Nest chamber at end of burrow may be bare or lined with grasses. 
Siberian-Accentor,Prunella montanella,Accentors,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Siberian-Rubythroat,Calliope calliope,Old World Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Slate-throated-Redstart,Myioborus miniatus,Wood Warblers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Slaty-backed-Gull,Larus schistisagus,Gulls and Terns,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Smew,Mergellus albellus,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Smiths-Longspur,Calcarius pictus,Longspurs and Snow Buntings,Prairies; fields; airports; in summer; tundra. Breeds along treeline in the North; where stunted forest gives way to tundra; mainly in areas of grassy or sedgy tundra with scattered low shrubs and short conifers. Winters on shortgrass plains; heavily grazed pastures; airport fields.,Does all its foraging while walking or running on the ground. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 1-6. Pale tan to pale green; marked with lavender and dark brown. Incubation is by female only; 11-13 days. Young: Fed by female and by one or more males. Young leave the nest about 7-9 days after hatching; unable to fly well for about another week. 1 brood per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet is mainly seeds for much of year; especially in winter; including seeds of weeds and grasses; also waste grain. Also eats insects; and these become major part of diet during breeding season; included are caterpillars; beetles; grasshoppers; flies; moths; damselflies; and others; as well as spiders and snails. ,Unusual breeding system. Breeds in small colonies; where males sing to attract females but do not defend territories. Both males and females are promiscuous; the young in a single nest are often of mixed parentage; and may be fed by more than one male. Nest site is on ground on dry hummock of tundra; among grass clumps or near base of low shrub. Often sunken in shallow depression; but not as well hidden as nests of some longspurs. Nest (built by female) is open cup of grass and sedges; lined with lichens; animal hair; and particularly with feathers (ptarmigan feathers especially favored). 
Smooth-billed-Ani,Crotophaga ani,Cuckoos; Roadrunners; Anis,Brushy edges; thickets. In Florida; usually found where dense brush stands next to open fields; pastures; or marshes. In its tropical range; found in a variety of brushy or semi-open habitats in the lowlands; mainly in humid areas. Generally avoids unbroken forest.,Forages mostly on the ground; hopping and running rather clumsily; will also forage well up in bushes. In pastures; often associates closely with cattle or other grazers; catching the insects flushed by the larger animals.,About 4 blue eggs laid by each female in group; nest may have up to 20 or more eggs. Incubation is by both sexes and apparently involves all adults in group; about 14 days. Young: Apparently fed by all adults in group; may climb out of nest before old enough to fly. Age at first flight not well known.,Mostly large insects. Feeds on insects including grasshoppers; beetles; moths; caterpillars; and others. May take external parasites from cattle. Also eats spiders; snails; and often small lizards. Will consume many small fruits and berries at some seasons; also seeds. May sometimes eat eggs of other birds.  ,Often nests communally: one or more pairs (perhaps as many as five pairs) will work together to build one large nest; then each female lays eggs there; and all the adults help to incubate the eggs and care for the young. Nest site is in dense shrub or tree; 5-30' above the ground; usually fairly low. Nest (built by both sexes; apparently by all adult members of group) is a bulky bowl of twigs and weeds; lined with leaves. 
Snail-Kite,Rostrhamus sociabilis,Hawks and Eagles,Fresh marshes and canals. In Florida; found at large freshwater lakes and marshes. Favors shallow waters; with stands of sawgrass and cattails mixed with areas of open water and with a few shrubs or low trees. In the American tropics; also in wet savannahs; rice fields; sugarcane fields.,Hunts by gliding slowly and low over marsh; dropping to pick up snail with one foot from surface of water or plants. Sometimes perches low; scanning surrounding area for snails; then flies to catch one. Kite flies to perch; holds snail with one foot while extracting snail from shell with long; curved upper mandible of bill.,Currently in Florida; usually 2-3. Formerly may have laid more eggs there; regularly 4; rarely 5-6; smaller clutches today may be response to lowered food supply. Eggs white; marked with brown. Incubation is by both parents; 26-28 days. Young: Both parents feed the young at first; bringing them snails. After 3-6 weeks; one parent (either one) usually departs; may find another mate and nest again. Remaining parent cares for young until they are 9-11 weeks old. Young may climb out of nest at 4-5 weeks; can fly well at 6-7 weeks.,Large snails. Under normal conditions; Florida birds live almost entirely on large apple snails (genus Pomacea). When the snails become scarce; as during drought; the kites may eat many small turtles. Also rarely eat small snails; rodents; crabs. ,Usually nests in loose colonies. In courtship; male flies up and dives short distance repeatedly near female; flies with exaggerated deep wingbeats. Male may feed snails to female. Nest site is over water in shrub or low tree; sometimes in cattails or sawgrass; usually 3-15' above water; rarely up to 30' or higher. Nest (built mostly by male) is bulky platform of sticks and twigs; lined with vines and weeds. 
Snow-Bunting,Plectrophenax nivalis,Longspurs and Snow Buntings,Prairies; fields; dunes; shores. In summer; tundra. Breeds on northern tundra; mainly in areas with rocky outcrops; boulder fields; cliffs; or rocky beaches; generally avoiding unbroken wet tundra. Winters in various kinds of open country; including shortgrass prairie; farmland; beaches; lake shores.,Forages while walking and running on the ground. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,4-7; sometimes 2-9. Whitish to pale blue-green; marked with brown and black. Incubation is by female; 10-16 days. In some parts of range; male feeds female on nest throughout incubation period; allowing her to spend more time on eggs -- important in cold northern climate. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10-17 days after hatching. 1 brood per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. Seeds of grasses; weeds; and sedges make up a major part of diet at most seasons; especially in winter; may also consume buds and leaves in spring. Also eats many insects in summer; including crane flies; other flies; beetles; caterpillars; true bugs; and others; plus some spiders. Young are fed mostly on insects. In coastal areas; may eat tiny crustaceans and other marine life. ,Males arrive on breeding grounds 3-6 weeks before females; to stake out territories containing suitable nest sites. In territorial and courtship display; male flies up 20-30'; then glides down while singing. In courtship on ground; male spreads wings and tail; turns his back to female to show off contrasting pattern; and makes short runs away from her. Nest site is in some protected cavity; as in a deep fissure among rocks; sometimes under manmade debris or in hole in ground. Nest (built by female) is a bulky cup of grass and moss; lined with fine grass; rootlets; plant down; and especially with feathers or hair. 
Snow-Goose,Anser caerulescens,Ducks and Geese,Tundra (summer); marshes; grain fields; ponds; bays. In summer on Arctic tundra usually within 5 miles of coast; near lakes or rivers. During migration and winter in coastal marshes; estuaries; freshwater marshes; agricultural country. Greater Snow Goose often nests in higher and drier tundra; and in migration and winter is more often in saltwater habitats than Lesser Snow.,forages mostly by walking in shallow water or on land. Except when nesting; usually feeds in flocks; sometimes mixed with other kinds of geese.,3-5; sometimes 1-7; rarely 8. Whitish; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by female only; 22-23 days; up to 25. Young: Usually leave nest within a few hours after hatching; they find their own food; and are tended by both parents. Family group may travel miles on foot away from nest site. Young fledge at 42-50 days.,Almost entirely plant material. Feeds on seeds; leaves; and roots of many species of wild grasses; also of sedges; bulrushes; horsetail; others. Very young goslings may feed on insect larvae. In fall; may eat many berries. Winter flocks often feed on waste grain in agricultural fields. ,May mate for life. Usually first breeds at age of 3 years. In one courtship display; male and female face each other and stretch necks upward rapidly and repeatedly in unison. Often nests in colonies. Nest site (selected by female) usually on slight ridge or hummock; with good visibility. Same site may be used more than one season. Nest (built by female; mostly after first egg is laid) is shallow depression filled with bulky bowl of plant material; lined with down. 
Snowy-Egret,Egretta thula,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Marshes; swamps; ponds; shores. Widespread in many types of aquatic habitats; including fresh and salt water; in coastal areas; may seek sheltered bays. Inland; favors extensive marshes and other large wetlands. Sometimes forages in dry fields. Nests in colonies in trees; shrubs; mangroves; sometimes on or near the ground in marshes.,Often forages actively; walking or running in shallow water; also standing still and waiting for prey to approach. May stir bottom sediments with feet to startle prey into motion. Sometimes hovers and then drops to water. Also may feed in open fields; sometimes following cattle to catch insects flushed by the animals.,3-5; sometimes 2-6. Pale blue-green. Incubation is by both sexes; 20-24 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. Last young to hatch may starve. Young may clamber out of nest after 20-25 days; probably unable to fly before 30 days.,Includes fish; insects; crustaceans. Diet is varied; includes fish; crabs; crayfish; frogs; snakes; insects; snails; worms; lizards; rodents. ,Breeds in colonies; often or usually mixed with other species of wading birds. Male selects nest site and displays there to ward off rivals and attract a mate. Displays include pointing bill straight up; raising all plumes; and pumping head up and down while calling; variant of this sometimes given in short flight. Also flies in circles around nest site; flies high and then tumbles down. Nest:  Site is in tree or shrub; usually 5-10' up; sometimes on ground or higher in tree. Nest (built by both sexes) is a platform of sticks. 
Snowy-Owl,Bubo scandiacus,Superb Owls,Prairies; fields; marshes; beaches; dunes; in summer; arctic tundra. Breeds on tundra; from just north of treeline to the northernmost land. Prefers very open tundra; either in hilly country or wetter areas near coast. Winters in open country; including prairies; farmland; coastal marshes; beaches; large airports.,Often hunts by day. Usually hunts by watching for prey from a perch; then pursuing it in swift flight and catching prey in talons. Sometimes seeks prey by flying low; or by hovering and watching ground. May locate prey by sight or sound.,3-11. Clutch size quite variable; with more eggs laid in years when prey is abundant. Eggs whitish; becoming nest-stained. Incubation is by female only; 31-33 days; male brings food to incubating female. Eggs hatch at intervals; so that female will be caring for first young while still incubating last eggs. Young: Female remains with young; male brings food; female takes it and feeds them. Young may leave nest after 2-3 weeks; but not able to fly well until about 7 weeks; fed by parents up to at least 9-10 weeks.,Varied; includes lemmings; plus other mammals and birds. In Arctic; may feed almost exclusively on lemmings when these are available. Otherwise; feeds on wide variety of prey. Takes mammals including rabbits; hares; voles; ground squirrels. In coastal areas may feed heavily on birds; including ducks; geese; grebes; murrelets; and sometimes songbirds. Also may eat fish; carrion. ,In many regions of Arctic; may breed mainly in years when lemmings are abundant; failing to nest at all when lemmings are scarce. Male owl defends territory with deep hooting in early spring. In courtship; male flies with deep; slow wingbeats; often carrying a lemming in his bill; landing near female; he leans forward; partly raising wings. Nest: Chooses a raised site; on top of mound or ridge in hilly country; or on hummock in low-lying areas; always with good visibility in very open tundra. Site may be used for several years. Nest (built by female) is simple depression in tundra; with no lining added. 
Snowy-Plover,Charadrius nivosus,Plovers,Beaches; sandy flats. At all seasons; tends to be found in places where habitat matches pale color of back -- dry sand beaches along coast; salt pans or alkaline flats in interior. Usually in places with very little vegetation; not around marshes. Also sometimes forages on open mudflats.,Typically they run a few steps and then pause; then run again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible. Will sometimes hold one foot forward and shuffle it rapidly over the surface of sand or mud; as if to startle small creatures into moving.,3; sometimes 2; rarely 4. Pale buff; dotted with black. Incubation is by both parents; 26-32 days. Male usually incubates at night; female most of day. Young: Downy young leave nest a few hours after hatching; feed themselves; can fly at age of 28-32 days. In some areas; both parents tend young. In other areas; female may depart in less than 6 days; leaving male to raise young; female may then find another mate; and raise another set of young. In these cases; male from first nest may also find a new mate and renest after first young have fledged.,Includes crustaceans; insects; marine worms. Along coast; may feed mostly on tiny crustaceans; mollusks; and marine worms; also some insects. At inland sites; diet may be mostly insects; including various flies and beetles. ,May nest in loose colonies or as isolated pairs; sometimes nests close to tern colonies. Unlike many shorebirds; male seems to have no aerial display over territory. Nest site is on open bare ground; sometimes close to a grass clump or piece of driftwood. Nest is shallow scrape in ground; lined with bits of shell; grass; pebbles; other debris; sometimes surrounded with similar items. 
Solitary-Sandpiper,Tringa solitaria,Sandpipers,Streamsides; wooded swamps and ponds; fresh marshes. In migration generally along shaded streams and ponds; riverbanks; narrow channels in marshes. Sometimes along the edges of open mudflats; but generally avoids tidal flats and salt marsh. Nests in muskeg region; with bogs and ponds surrounded by forest of spruce and other trees.,Mostly forages in shallow water; moving about actively; picking items from surface; also probes in water and mud. While walking in water; may pause and quiver one foot; presumably to stir up small creatures from the bottom.,4; rarely 5. Olive to buff; marked with brown. Incubation details poorly known; may be by both parents; roughly 23-24 days. Young: Development and behavior of young poorly known. Since parents are not known to feed young; apparently the chicks must jump to the ground; probably tended there by one or both parents. Age of young at first flight not known.,Insects and other small aquatic creatures. Feeds on many insects of water and shore; including beetles; dragonfly nymphs; grasshoppers; also crustaceans; spiders; worms; mollusks; occasionally small frogs. ,Breeding behavior not well known. In breeding season; male gives repeated call while perching on tops of trees; or while performing display flight over nesting territory. Nest: Uses nests built by songbirds such as American Robin; Rusty Blackbird; Bohemian Waxwing; Eastern Kingbird; Gray Jay. Nest chosen is usually in spruce or other conifer; sometimes in deciduous tree; 4-40' above ground. Sandpipers may sometimes take over a freshly-built nest. Female may add lining material to original nest. 
Song-Sparrow,Melospiza melodia,New World Sparrows,Thickets; brush; marshes; roadsides; gardens. Habitat varies over its wide range. In most areas; found in brushy fields; streamsides; shrubby marsh edges; woodland edges; hedgerows; well-vegetated gardens. Some coastal populations live in salt marshes. Nests in dense streamside brush in southwestern deserts; and in any kind of dense low cover on Aleutian Islands; Alaska.,Forages mostly on the ground; sometimes scratching in the soil to turn up items. Also sometimes forages in very shallow water (fractions of an inch deep) and up in shrubs and trees. Will come to bird feeders placed close to good cover.,Typically 4; often 3-5; rarely 2-6. Pale greenish white; heavily spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is apparently by female only; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young normally leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching; remain with their parents about another 3 weeks.,Mostly insects and seeds. Eats many insects; especially in summer; including beetles; grasshoppers; caterpillars; ants; wasps; and many others; also spiders. Feeds heavily on seeds; especially in winter; mainly those of grasses and weeds. Birds in coastal marshes and on islands also feed on small crustaceans and mollusks; perhaps rarely on small fish. ,Males often defend only small nesting territories; so high densities of Song Sparrows may be present in good habitat. In courtship; male may chase female; may perform fluttering flight among the bushes with neck outstretched and head held high. Nest site varies; usually on ground under clump of grass or shrub; or less than 4' above the ground; sometimes up to 10' or higher. Raised sites may be in shrubs; low trees; or marsh vegetation; often above water. Rarely nests in cavities in trees. Nest (built mostly or entirely by female) is an open cup of weeds; grass; leaves; strips of bark; lined with fine grass; rootlets; animal hair. 
Sooty-Grouse,Dendragapus fuliginosus,Pheasants and Grouse,Deciduous and mixed forests in mountains in summer; conifer forests in winter. Prime summer habitat for inland birds is where forest meets open country. In winter; these birds favor dense forests of conifers. Coastal birds may be in semi-open coniferous forest (old-growth or recently logged) all year.,Forages mostly on ground in summer; with more foraging in trees in winter.,5-10; sometimes 2-12. Pale buff; usually speckled with brown. Incubation is by female only; 25-28 days. Young: Usually leave nest within a day after hatching; and follow female; young find all their own food. Female often fearless in defense of eggs or young; standing her ground when approached closely. Young can make short flights at age of 8-9 days; are full-grown at about 13 weeks.,Conifer needles; leaves; insects. Diet in summer is mostly leaves; flowers; buds; berries; and conifer needles; also many insects. Very young birds may eat more insects than adults. In winter feeds mostly on needles of conifers; including pines; hemlocks; firs; douglas-firs. ,In breeding season; male gives deep song punctuated with short flights; wings fluttering loudly. Typically sings from high in trees. In peak display; male struts with tail raised and fanned; neck feathers spread to reveal patches of bright skin. Female mates with male; then departs. Nest site is on ground; under cover such as shrub; log; rock ledge. Nest a shallow scrape; lined with dead twigs; needles; leaves; a few feathers. 
Sooty-Shearwater,Ardenna grisea,Shearwaters and Petrels,Open ocean. Widespread at sea; but concentrates around upwellings and over continental shelf in cooler waters; also where cold and warm water masses meet. May come close to shore if water is deep. Breeds on islands in southern oceans with soil for burrows or with suitable rock crevices for nest sites.,Forages by plunging into water from a few feet above the surface and swimming underwater; propelled by wings; also dives from surface; and seizes items at or just below surface while sitting on water. Sometimes feeds in association with whales; dolphins; and other seabirds.,One. White. Incubation is by both sexes; averages 52-56 days. Young:  Both parents feed young; visiting at night; feeding frequently when chick is small and less often as it matures. Finally young bird is abandoned; and it eventually leaves to go to sea. Period from hatching to departure from nest averages about 97 days. Young usually departs from island at night.,Mostly fish; crustaceans. Diet in North Pacific mainly small fish; also euphausiid shrimp and other crustaceans; squid; jellyfish. In North Atlantic may feed mostly on euphausiid shrimp and fish. ,In Australia and New Zealand; nesting season is September to May. First breeding at age of 5-9 years. Breeds in colonies on islands; with most activity in evening and at night. In courtship; pairs may call in duet. Nest:  Site is in burrow dug in soil; sometimes in natural crevice in rock. Burrow may be up to 10 feet long. Nest is loose foundation of leaves and grass. 
Sooty-Tern,Onychoprion fuscatus,Gulls and Terns,Warm tropical seas. Generally far out at sea; wandering widely but often following warm-water currents. Avoids shallow waters and areas near mainland coast. Nests mostly on small islands; on open sandy beaches with sparse vegetation.,Forages by dipping down in flight to take fish from surface of water (or may take flying fish from above surface). Rarely or never plunges into water for prey below surface. Feeds mainly where small fish have been driven to surface by schools of large predatory fish; congregating quickly where such temporary concentrations of food exist.,One. Whitish; variably marked with brown; lavender; gray; sometimes black. Incubation is by both sexes; 28-30 days. On hot days; parents stand and shade the eggs. Young: Both parents feed young; regurgitating small fish. Young wanders in vicinity of nest; may return to it to be fed. Capable of flight at about 8-9 weeks; may stay around colony another 2-3 weeks.,Mostly fish; some squid. Feeds mainly on small fish that live in dense schools far out at sea. Also some small squid. ,May not breed until age of 6 years or older. At Dry Tortugas; arrives in numbers two months before first eggs laid. At first; flocks visit site at night; circling over islands and calling; departing at dawn. Courtship involves high flight and gliding descent; on ground; birds strut and bow. Nest site is on ground; usually in open; sometimes under edge of shrubs. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is shallow scrape in soil; sometimes lined with a few leaves. 
Sora,Porzana carolina,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Fresh marshes; wet meadows; in winter; also salt marshes. Occurs in a variety of marshy situations; from extensive river marshes to grassy edges of small ponds. Also in damp meadows; and sometimes in tall-grass fields some distance from water. Breeds mostly in freshwater habitat with large stands of cattails; but moves into salt marshes at times; especially in winter.,Forages by picking items from surface of ground; water; or plants; sometimes probes with its bill in mud or among vegetation.,10-12; sometimes 6-18. Rich buff; spotted with brown. Number of eggs is large for nest; so eggs are sometimes arranged in two layers. Incubation is by both sexes; 18-20 days. Young: Because incubation begins after first few eggs are laid; eggs do not hatch at same time; one parent may care for downy hatchlings while other continues to incubate remaining eggs. Young leave nest shortly after hatching; are fed by both parents. Age at first flight 21-25 days.,Mostly seeds; insects; snails. At least at some seasons; feeds mainly on seeds; including those of smartweeds; sedges; grasses; other marsh plants. May feed heavily on wild rice in late summer and fall. Also eats a wide variety of insects; snails; other aquatic invertebrates. ,Courtship displays by both members of a pair involve ceremonial preening; sometimes bowing; facing toward and then away from each other. Nest site is in dense marsh vegetation; especially cattails; sedges; bulrushes. Nest (built by both sexes) is well-built cup of dead cattails; grasses; other plants; lined with finer material; placed a few inches above water. Often has vegetation arched over top; and sometimes has ramp or runway of plant material leading to nest. 
South-Polar-Skua,Stercorarius maccormicki,Skuas and Jaegers,Open ocean. Ranges widely at sea; over both warm and very cold waters. Appears far off North American coast where there are concentrations of other birds from which to steal food. Almost never seen from shore on this continent. Nests in Antarctica; on islands and mainland; on barren ground.,Forages at sea by plunging into water from flight; or by seizing items while sitting on surface. Often steals food from other seabirds: may grab a shearwater or gull with its bill and shake the other bird violently to make it disgorge its catch.,Two; sometimes one. Olive to brown; blotched with darker brown. Incubation is by both sexes; but female does more. Incubation period 24-34 days; usually 28-29. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young may leave nest soon after hatching; wander in immediate vicinity. Although both eggs usually hatch; usually only one young survives to fledging. Age at first flight 49-59 days.,Mainly fish. Diet in North American waters not well known; but feeds mostly on fish while at sea. On breeding grounds; some feed mainly on the eggs and young of penguins; and on carrion around penguin colonies. ,In Antarctic; some nest close to penguin colonies; feeding on eggs and chicks. Where this species overlaps with the larger Brown Skua; the Browns effectively "control" the penguin colonies; and the South Polars must forage at sea. Courtship involves much posturing and calling; male feeds female. Usually first breeds at age of 5-6 years; birds usually have same mates and same nest sites every year thereafter. In aggressive display near nest; both wings are raised together over back; head extended forward while bird gives harsh calls. Nest site is on ground. Nest is simple scrape in soil or moss; often begun by male and completed by female. 
Spectacled-Eider,Somateria fischeri,Ducks and Geese,Ocean; tundra. In breeding season on wet low-lying tundra with many lakes and ponds; sometimes well inland. At other seasons on ocean. May be near coastline but often far offshore; along edges and openings of floating pack ice.,During most of year forages mainly by diving and swimming underwater. Supposedly able to remain submerged longer than most diving ducks. On tundra in summer may forage by dabbling in shallow water or by walking on land.,NA,mostly mollusks. During most of year; when at sea; diet is mainly mollusks. In summer on tundra; diet includes many aquatic insects and some crustaceans; plus much plant material such as sedges; grasses; and berries. ,Most pairs evidently formed in winter; before spring migration to nesting grounds. Male's displays include rearing up out of water; wing-flaps; shaking head rapidly; stretching neck upward and then jerking head back in quick motion. Nest site is usually very close to edge of tundra pond; on a raised ridge or hummock; sites may be re-used in subsequent years. Nest (built by female) is a shallow depression lined with plant material and with large amounts of down. Eggs 3-6; sometimes 1-8. Olive buff. Incubation is by the female only; about 24 days. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching; are led to water by female. Young are tended by female but find all their own food. Age at first flight 53 days or less; a rapid development for large size of bird.
Spot-breasted-Oriole,Icterus pectoralis,Blackbirds and Orioles,Tall trees; suburbs. In our area; found only in suburbs of southern Florida; in neighborhoods with many exotic trees and shrubs bewaring berries and flowers at all seasons. In native range in the tropics; found mostly in dry woods; thorn scrub; trees along rivers; trees in towns.,Forages mostly by moving rather slowly and deliberately among branches and foliage of trees. Often visits flowers; may use its bill to break off long blossoms to get at nectar at the base.,Probably about 2-5. Whitish to pale blue; marked with brown and black. Incubation is probably by female; but incubation behavior and timing are not well known. Young: Both parents bring food to the nestlings. Age at which the young leave the nest is not well known. Young may stay with parents for some time after fledging.,Includes berries; nectar; insects. Diet has not been studied in detail; but includes many berries and small fruits; also some cultivated fruit. Takes nectar from flowers; and may eat parts of the flowers as well. Also eats many insects. ,In spring; male sings rich; whistled song to defend nesting territory; female may sing at times also. Nest: Placed in tree; near end of slender branch and often well above ground (in the tropics; may also nest in yuccas or other low plants). Nest (apparently built by female) is long hanging pouch; woven of grass; palm fibers; and other plant fibers; with its rim firmly attached to branch and the rest hanging free. 
Spotted-Dove,Streptopelia chinensis,Pigeons and Doves,Residential areas; parks; river woods. Found mostly in altered habitats of suburbs; especially well-watered areas with trees and lawns. Also found around farms; and in groves of trees (including eucalyptus) along streams.,Forages mostly on the ground; walking about and picking up seeds. Usually forages in pairs or small groups. Will come to bird feeders; but often picks up seeds from ground under elevated feeders.,2. White. Incubation probably by both parents; incubation period 2 weeks or more. Young: Both parents probably feed young "pigeon milk." Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Mostly seeds. Diet in North America not studied in detail; but includes seeds of many plants. ,In territorial and courtship display; male flies up steeply with noisy clapping of wings; then glides down in wide circle with wings and tail fully spread. When perched; male displays by bowing and cooing; lowering head to show off spotted collar. Nest site is usually in large shrub or tree; on horizontal branch or fork of branch; 8-40' above ground. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is loose platform of twigs. 
Spotted-Owl,Strix occidentalis,Superb Owls,Mature old-growth forests; conifers; wooded canyons. Along Pacific seaboard; mainly in undisturbed old-growth timber; including douglas-fir and redwoods. In southwest; generally in forested mountains and canyons; especially where tall trees grow close to rocky cliffs.,Hunts mostly at night; but also by day while nesting. Hunts mostly by watching from a perch; then swooping out to capture prey in talons. Prey is taken from the ground and out of trees; and bats may be captured in the air.,2; sometimes 1-3; rarely 4. Whitish. Incubation is by female only; 28-32 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Female remains with young at first; male brings food for female and young. After about 2 weeks; female hunts also. If humans approach nest; adults perch nearby but make no active defense. Young leave nest at about 5 weeks; are tended and fed by parents for some time thereafter.,Mostly small mammals. Specializes on small forest mammals; including woodrats; deer mice; voles; red tree mice (Phenacomys); small rabbits; bats. Also takes some small birds; reptiles; large insects. ,Male defends nesting territory by calling at dusk and at night. Pairs typically use same nest site for life; but may not nest every year. Nest: Chooses a sheltered site inside large hollow tree in deep forest; in cave or crevice in cliff; sometimes in old stick nest of hawks or other large birds. No nest built; makes simple scrape in debris in bottom of site. 
Spotted-Redshank,Tringa erythropus,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Spotted-Sandpiper,Actitis macularius,Sandpipers,Pebbly lake shores; ponds; streamsides; in winter; also seashores. Breeds near the edge of fresh water in a wide variety of settings; including lakes; ponds; rivers; streams; in either open or wooded country. In migration and winter also found along coast on mudflats; beaches; breakwaters; also on such inland habitats as sewage ponds; irrigation ditches.,Forages in a variety of ways. Picks up items from surface of ground or water; snatches flying insects out of the air; plucks small items from shallow water. On open flats; may crouch low; stalk slowly; then dash forward to catch insects or small crabs.,4; sometimes 3; rarely 5. Buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is usually by male only; 20-24 days; female may help incubate final clutch of the season. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Young feed themselves; are usually tended by male only. Age at first flight about 17-21 days.,Insects; crustaceans; other invertebrates. Feeds on wide variety of insects; also earthworms; crabs; crayfish; small mollusks; small fish; sometimes bits of carrion. ,Has a complicated mating system. Females are slightly larger and much more aggressive; actively defending breeding territory with displays in flight and on ground. At least in some parts of range; one female may mate with up to five males during a season; each time; female lays a clutch of eggs; leaving male to incubate the eggs and care for the young. Nest site is near water or some distance away; on ground under shrubs or weeds; next to fallen log; etc. Nest (built by both sexes) is shallow depression lined with grass; moss; sometimes feathers. 
Spotted-Towhee,Pipilo maculatus,New World Sparrows,Open woods; undergrowth; brushy edges. In the varied terrain of the West; this towhee often lives in chaparral; mountain manzanita thickets; scrub oaks; or pinyon-juniper woods with dense understory.,Forages mostly on the ground; frequently scratching in the leaf-litter. Also sometimes forages up in shrubs and low trees.,3-5; sometimes 2-6. Creamy white to very pale gray; with spots of brown and gray often concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-11 days after hatching; may remain with parents for some time thereafter. 1 or 2 broods per year; rarely 3.,Mostly insects; seeds; berries. Diet varies with season. Eats many insects; especially in summer; including beetles; caterpillars; moths; true bugs; and many others; also spiders; snails; and millipedes. Also eats many seeds; plus acorns; berries; and small fruits. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing; often from a high perch. In courtship; male may chase female. Nest site is on the ground under a shrub; or in low bushes; usually less than 5' above the ground. Nest (built by female) is an open cup of grass; twigs; weeds; rootlets; strips of bark; lined with finer materials; sometimes including animal hair. 
Spragues-Pipit,Anthus spragueii,Wagtails and Pipits,Plains; shortgrass prairies. Breeds in relatively dry grassland; especially native prairie; avoiding brushy areas and cultivated fields. Winters in similar shortgrass habitats including pastures and prairies; and grassy patches within fields of crops such as alfalfa.,Forages by walking on the ground; usually among fairly dense short grass; searching for insects and seeds. Forages alone; not in flocks.,4-5; rarely 3-6. Whitish; heavily spotted with maroon or purplish-brown. Incubation is probably by female; incubation period not well known. Adult does not fly to nest; but lands several feet away and walks there. Incubating bird may not flush from nest until approached within a few feet. Young: Fed by female; possibly by male; but details not well known. May leave nest as early as 10-11 days after hatching; before able to fly well. Adults may raise 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects; some seeds. Diet is not known in detail. Apparently eats mainly insects; especially in summer; including grasshoppers; crickets; various beetles; moths; and others. Also eats many small seeds of grasses and weeds; perhaps more in fall and winter. Young birds are fed almost entirely on insects. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory; spiraling up to 300' or even higher above the ground; then hovering and circling for several minutes while singing repeatedly. In some cases; a single song-flight may last half an hour or even longer. Nest site is on ground in grassy field; usually in a slight depression or tucked into the side of a clump of grass. Nest (probably built by female) is a solidly woven cup of dry grass stems; sometimes lined with finer grass. Often has grass arched over the top; with entrance at the side. 
Spruce-Grouse,Falcipennis canadensis,Pheasants and Grouse,Conifer forest; pines; muskeg. Almost always in conifer forest but not necessarily in spruce. Prime habitat includes burned areas grown up to dense stands of jack pine or lodgepole pine; also forests of spruce; subalpine fir; hemlock; with dense undergrowth. Also on blueberry barrens. During dispersal in fall; sometimes found in deciduous woods.,Does much of its foraging on the ground in summer; forages almost entirely in trees in winter.,4-10; usually 5-7. Olive to buff; usually blotched with brown. Females of Franklin's race tend to lay fewer eggs. Incubation is by female only; about 20-24 days. When leaving nest; female may partly cover eggs with dry needles and leaves. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Female tends young; brooding them at night and in cool weather; young find all their own food. Young can make short flights at 6-8 days old; are full-grown at about 10-11 weeks; become independent at about 10-15 weeks.,Mostly conifer needles. Adults are mostly vegetarian; feeding heavily on needles of pines; spruce; other conifers. Diet may be almost entirely conifer needles in winter. At other times also eats fresh green shoots and leaves of other plants; berries; flowers; insects; snails; and fungi. Very young birds may eat more insects. ,Both females and males defend individual territories in breeding season. Male displays by drumming with wings; making deep thumping sound audible only at close range. Males of Franklin's race also make loud wing-clap in flight. In courtship; male raises and spreads tail; fluffs out feathers; postures in front of female. One male may mate with several females. Nest site is on ground under dense cover. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression; lined with a few needles and leaves. 
Stellers-Eider,Polysticta stelleri,Ducks and Geese,Coasts; ocean. In breeding season on low-lying tundra with many lakes and ponds; often some distance inland. At other seasons on ocean; in areas with clear water; as along rocky shores or around edges of pack ice.,During most of year forages at sea by diving and swimming underwater. In summer; may forage in shallow water by wading or swimming; with head submerged or dabbling at surface.,7-8; sometimes 5-10. Olive buff. Incubation by female only; incubation period unknown. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching and go to water. Female tends young; but young find all their own food. 2 or more broods of young sometimes join under care of 1 or more females. Age at first flight not known.,varies with season and habitat. Diet at sea is mostly mollusks and crustaceans; but also echinoderms; polychaete worms; small fish. On tundra in summer; eats many aquatic insects; also some plant material such as pondweeds and crowberries. ,Pairs formed in winter flocks. In courtship; several males may surround one female. Males' displays include rearing up out of water; turning head rapidly from side to side; tossing head back with rapid motion; may lead to courtship flight; with several males in pursuit of female. Nest site is on ground near water; on open tundra or surrounded by low scrub. Nest; built by female; is shallow depression lined with bits of plant material and large amounts of down. 
Stellers-Jay,Cyanocitta stelleri,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Conifer and pine-oak forests. Most numerous as a breeder in the mountains and along the northern coast in forests of pine; spruce; and fir; also lives in pine-oak forest; and locally in riverside groves of oaks and other deciduous trees. Especially when not nesting; will range into other woodland types; orchards; and well-wooded suburbs.,Forages mostly high in trees but also low or on ground. Opens hard seeds and acorns by pounding on them with bill.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 2-6. Pale blue-green; finely spotted with brown or olive. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 16-18 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight not well known; about 3 weeks.,Omnivorous. Diet is about two-thirds vegetable and one-third animal matter. Feeds heavily on pine seeds; acorns; and other nuts and seeds; especially during fall and winter; also eats many berries and wild fruits; sometimes cultivated fruit. Especially in summer; eats many insects; including beetles; wasps; and wild bees. Also eats spiders; birds' eggs; table scraps; sometimes small rodents or lizards. ,In courtship; male feeds female. Adults are quiet and secretive while nesting; but become noisy and aggressive if nest is threatened. Nest site is in tree; usually coniferous; sometimes in deciduous tree or shrub. Height varies; usually 10-30' above the ground; sometimes lower or much higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky ragged cup of twigs; weeds; moss; dry leaves; cemented together with mud and lined with fine grass; rootlets; and pine needles. Bits of paper often added to nest. 
Stilt-Sandpiper,Calidris himantopus,Sandpipers,Shallow pools; mudflats; marshes; tundra in summer. Typically on fresh water; including ponds and marshes with extensive shallows. Even in coastal areas; tends to occur on lagoons or ponds; not on tidal flats. Breeds on tundra; especially in sedge meadows with raised ridges for nest sites.,Forages mostly by wading in shallow water and probing vertically with its bill in the mud of the bottom; often thrusting its head underwater. Sometimes picks insects from surface of water. Feeding is similar to that of dowitchers; and it often associates closely with dowitcher flocks.,4. Pale cream to olive-green; heavily dotted with brown. Incubation is by both parents; 19-21 days. Female incubates at night; male during the day. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching; find all their own food. Both parents may tend young at first; but female usually departs in less than a week; male after about 2 weeks. Young can fly at about 17-18 days.,Includes insects; mollusks; seeds. Diet not well known; but includes a wide variety of aquatic insects (including fly larvae and beetles); marine worms; snails; also the seeds; leaves; and roots of aquatic plants. ,Male displays over breeding territory by flying slowly with shallow wingbeats; calling incessantly; then gliding with wings in shallow "V" while giving guttural song. In courtship; spectacular aerial displays; male pursues female in the air; gets in front of her and then raises wings high over his back; singing as he plummets. Nest site is in a dry spot on low ridge or on top of sedge hummock; often surrounded by water or wet ground. Nest is shallow depression in vegetation; with little or no lining; male makes nest scrapes; female chooses one. 
Streak-backed-Oriole,Icterus pustulatus,Blackbirds and Orioles,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Sulphur-bellied-Flycatcher,Myiodynastes luteiventris,Tyrant Flycatchers,Sycamore-walnut canyons. In our area; found mainly in lower parts of canyons in the mountains; where tall sycamores and other trees grow along streams through pine-oak forest. Also locally in sycamores and cottonwoods along streams at lower elevations. In the tropics; found in open woods; groves; and forest edges.,Forages by watching from a perch; then flying out to capture insects. Usually forages fairly high; perching on a twig within the shady upper levels of a tree. Flies out and hovers while taking an insect from foliage or branches; or may catch insects in mid-air.,3-4. White to pale buff; heavily spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; 15-16 days. Young: Both parents bring food to nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 16-18 days.,Mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; but feeds mainly on insects; probably including large caterpillars; beetles; katydids; and others. Also eats some small fruits and berries. ,In courtship; male and female perch close together; shaking their heads back and forth and calling in duet. Very aggressive during the nesting season; pairs of Sulphur-bellies may compete for choice cavities with other hole-nesting birds; even Elegant Trogons. Nests mainly in mid-summer in Arizona; most eggs probably hatching in July. Nest site in Arizona is usually in large natural cavity of sycamore; 20-50' above the ground. Female builds nest. If cavity is deep; she fills it most of the way with twigs and bark strips; then builds nest on top of this foundation; mostly of fine leaf stems and pine needles. 
Summer-Tanager,Piranga rubra,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Woods; groves (especially oaks). In the Southeast; breeds in dry open woods; especially those of oak; hickory; or pine. In the Southwest; breeds in cottonwood-willow forests along streams. Winters in the tropics; mainly in lowlands but also up to middle elevations in mountains; both in solid forest and in edges and clearings with scattered trees.,Forages mainly in the tops of trees. Moves rather deliberately; pausing to peer around. Often makes short flights to capture flying insects in mid-air; or hovers momentarily while picking them from branches or foliage. Will break into wasp nests to eat the larvae inside.,3-5; typically 4. Pale green or blue-green; with brown and gray spots sometimes concentrated at larger end. Incubation is apparently by female only; 11-12 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known.,Mostly insects; some berries. Diet in summer is mainly insects; often noted feeding on bees and wasps; and also eats many beetles; cicadas; caterpillars; and grasshoppers; plus bugs; flies; and others; also eats some spiders. Feeds on berries and small fruits at times. ,Male sings in spring to defend nesting territory. In early stages of courtship; male frequently chases female. Nest site is in a tree; often an oak; pine; or cottonwood. Placed on a horizontal branch; usually well out from trunk and 10-35' above the ground. Nest is a loosely made shallow cup of grass; weed stems; bark strips; leaves; spiderwebs; Spanish moss (where available); lined with fine grass. Apparently built only by female; although male accompanies her during nest building. 
Surf-Scoter,Melanitta perspicillata,Ducks and Geese,Ocean surf; salt bays; marinas; in summer; fresh Arctic lakes; tundra. Breeding habitat is near lakes and slow-moving rivers in far north; in sparsely forested or semi-open terrain; sometimes out on open tundra. In winter mostly on ocean in shallow bays or estuaries. Some may winter on Great Lakes; rarely on other bodies of fresh water.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled mainly by the feet; with the wings usually half-opened.,5-9; usually about 7. Pale buff. Incubation is by female only; incubation period not known. Young: Leave nest and go to water shortly after hatching. Young are tended by female; but feed themselves. Age of young at first flight not well known.,Mostly mollusks. In addition to mollusks; also feeds on crustaceans; aquatic insects; small fishes; echinoderms; marine worms. Also eats some plant material; mainly pondweeds and sedges. Young eat mostly aquatic insects at first; also mollusks and some plant material; including sedges; pondweeds; and crowberries. ,Pairs are formed on winter range. Several males may surround one female in courtship. Displays of male include swimming back and forth rapidly with neck stretched upward; exaggerated bowing; short display flights; males may pursue female underwater. Nest site is often some distance away from water; on ground; well hidden under low tree branches or in dense grass clump. Nest (built by female) is a shallow depression lined with down. 
Surfbird,Calidris virgata,Sandpipers,Rocky coasts; nests on mountain tundra. During migration and winter; mostly on rocky outer coasts and islands; also on stone jetties and breakwaters. Sometimes on sandy beaches or mudflats; especially during brief stops on migration. In summer; breeds on rather barren; rocky tundra above treeline in northern mountains.,Major feeding method on coast involves removing barnacles; limpets; and young mussels from rocks with a quick sideways jerk of the head; the Surfbird's thick bill is adapted for this behavior. Also picks up snails and insects from ground or rocks; sometimes probes in mud.,4. Buff; spotted with dark reddish-brown. Incubation is by both sexes; incubation period not well known. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young; but young find all their own food. Development of the chicks and age at first flight not well known.,Mostly insects; mollusks; barnacles. In summer on tundra; feeds mostly on insects; also spiders; snails; a few seeds. On coast (where it spends most of year); feeds on mollusks; such as mussels; limpets; and snails; as well as barnacles and other crustaceans; and other small invertebrates. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. In display over nesting territory; male makes long flight; fluttering wings through shallow arc; then gliding while giving repeated calls or harsh song. Nest site is on ground; in natural depression in rocky surface of high; dry ridge; in area surrounded by very low ground cover. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is simple lining of dead leaves; lichens; and moss added to nest depression. 
Swainsons-Hawk,Buteo swainsoni,Hawks and Eagles,Plains; dry grassland; farmland; ranch country. Breeds most commonly on northern Great Plains; in prairie regions with scattered groves of trees for nest sites. Less common in dry grassland farther west and in heavily farmed country. In migration; often pauses in fields where insect larvae may have been turned up by the plow.,May hunt by soaring over grassland; or by perching and scanning the ground. Skilled at catching flying insects in the air. When feeding on insects in fields; may catch them by running about on ground. May concentrate near grass fires; watching for prey driven into the open by the flames.,2-3; sometimes 1 or 4. Pale bluish white fading to dull white; usually lightly spotted with brown. Incubation is almost all by the female; about 34-35 days. Male brings food to female during incubation period. Young: Both parents bring food for young; but at first female may remain with young much of time while male hunts. Young can fly about 42-44 days after hatching; may remain with parents until fall migration.,Mostly small mammals and reptiles in early summer; large insects at other seasons. When feeding young; preys on ground squirrels; pocket gophers; mice; snakes; lizards; small birds; sometimes bats or carrion. At other seasons; diet shifts to mostly large insects. May feed heavily on grasshoppers and caterpillars in late summer. In winter in Argentina; follows and feeds on swarms of nomadic dragonflies. ,In courtship; members of pair engage in display flights; with circling and steep dives. On prairies with scattered groves of trees; may have conflicts with Great Horned Owl where both species attempt to nest in same grove. Nest site is usually in a tree or large shrub in open country; usually 15-30' above ground; but may be lower or higher; generally well hidden within foliage. May be built on top of old magpie nest. Sometimes nests on ledge of cliff or steep slope. Nest is a platform of sticks; lined with finer twigs; weeds. Often adds leafy green branches to nest. 
Swainsons-Thrush,Catharus ustulatus,Thrushes,Spruce forests and dense streamside woods; in migration; other woods. Breeds in far north and in mountains in coniferous forest with extensive leafy undergrowth; on Pacific Coast; also breeds in deciduous trees and thickets growing along streams. Occurs in many kinds of woodlands in migration. Winters in tropical forest.,Does much feeding on ground; but not as much as the other brown thrushes. Also forages in trees; and may hover momentarily to take insects from foliage or may catch them in mid-air.,3-4; rarely 5. Pale blue; with brown spots sometimes concentrated at larger end; sometimes almost unmarked. Incubation is by female; about 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10-13 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and berries. In North America; feeds on a variety of insects including beetles; ants; caterpillars; crickets; wasps; flies; moths; and others; also spiders and other invertebrates. Berries and fruits amount to over one-third of summer diet. Winter diet in tropics not well known; but often found in fruiting trees there. ,Male arrives on breeding grounds and establishes territory; defending it by singing. In aggressive display during encounters with intruders on territory; he sleeks down his feathers and points bill up. Nest: Usually placed on a horizontal branch; 2-10' above the ground; sometimes lower or much higher (rarely up to 30'). Often nests in conifers in the east and north; deciduous trees or shrubs in the west. Nest (built by female alone) is a bulky open cup of twigs; bark strips; moss; grass; leaves; sometimes with some mud added. Lined with bark fibers; lichens; animal hair; other soft materials. 
Swainsons-Warbler,Limnothlypis swainsonii,Wood Warblers,Swamps and river floodplain forests. Breeds both in swamps and bottomlands of the southern coastal plains and in moist Appalachian forests. In swamps; prefers large tract with dense understory and sparse ground cover. Found especially in canebrakes and dwarf palmetto. In Appalachians; prefers rhododendron-laurel-hemlock associations or yellow poplar; oak and maple with moderate undergrowth. Winters in woodland undergrowth in tropics.,Forages at a rapid walk in openings in understory; usually on ground or in leaf litter. Probes under leaves by flipping them over; also probes into ground with long heavy bill; and occasionally takes items from tree trunks or makes short flights to catch flying insects. Forages alone in winter or with mate in summer.,3; sometimes 2-5. Normally unmarked white; sometimes faintly spotted. Incubated by female; 13-15 days. Male feeds female; but only when she is off the nest. Young: Both parents feed nestlings for 10-12 days. Young then leave nest and follow parents to be fed for another 2-3 weeks. 1 brood per year.,Mostly adult and larval insects. Feeds on caterpillars; beetles; ants; crickets; grasshoppers; katydids; stink bugs; flies; other insects; also spiders and millipedes. Apparently eats no berries or nectar. ,Normally males hold very large territories; but in very good habitat will nest in loose colonies. Sings to hold breeding territory and to attract female to territory. Uses visual threat displays to repel rival males. Nest site is usually at edge of dense growth of cane; vines; or rhododendron. Placed near or over water; or up to 4' above ground. These open cup nests are inconspicuous and difficult to locate; even though they are the largest above-ground nests of all North American warblers. Constructed of leaves; sticks; vines; lined with soft material such as pine needles; Spanish moss; hair; grass; and ferns. Female builds nest alone. 
Swallow-tailed-Kite,Elanoides forficatus,Hawks and Eagles,Wooded river swamps. Requires tall trees for nesting and nearby open country with abundant prey. In North America found mostly in open pine woods near marsh or prairie; cypress swamps; other riverside swamp forest. In tropics; also found in lowland rain forest and mountain cloud forest.,Extremely maneuverable in flight. Catches flying insects in the air. Takes much of its food by swooping low over trees or lower growth; picking small creatures from the twigs or leaves without pausing. Young birds of other species are probably taken out of their nests.,2; sometimes 1-3. Creamy white; marked with dark brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 28-31 days. Young: During first week after hatching; young are brooded almost continuously by female. Male brings food to nest; and female feeds it to young. After about 2-3 weeks; female also may hunt and bring food to nest. Young may move about in nest tree after about 5 weeks; first fly at about 5-6 weeks.,Insects; frogs; lizards; birds. Adults apparently feed mostly on large insects at most times of year; including dragonflies; wasps; beetles; cicadas; grasshoppers; many others. Especially when feeding young; will capture many frogs; lizards; snakes; nestling birds. In tropics; also eats small fruits. ,Courtship may involve aerial chases by both sexes; male may feed female. Nest site is in tall tree in open woodland; usually in pine; sometimes in cypress; cottonwood; or other tree. Typically places nest near top of one of the tallest trees available; more than 60' above ground. Nest (built by both sexes) is platform of small sticks; lined with soft lichens and Spanish moss. 
Swamp-Sparrow,Melospiza georgiana,New World Sparrows,Fresh marshes with tussocks; bushes; or cattails; sedgy swamps. Breeds mostly in freshwater marshes with good growth of sedges; grass; or cattails; often with thickets of alder or willow; sometimes in swampy thickets around ponds and rivers. Also breeds locally in salt marshes on middle Atlantic Coast. During migration and winter found mainly in marshes; but also in streamside thickets; rank weedy fields.,Forages mostly on the ground; especially on wet mud near the water's edge; and sometimes feeds while wading in very shallow water. Also does some foraging up in marsh vegetation.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Pale green to greenish white; heavily marked with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; probably about 12-13 days. Male may feed female on the nest during incubation. Young: Both parents bring food to the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10-13 days after hatching. Often 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds heavily on insects; perhaps more so than related sparrows; especially in summer. Diet includes many beetles; caterpillars; grasshoppers; crickets; ants; and many others; as well as other arthropods. Also eats many seeds; especially in fall and winter; including those of grasses; weeds; and sedges. ,To defend nesting territory; male sings from a raised perch; such as the top of a cattail or a shrub in the marsh. May sing by day or night. Nest: Placed in marsh vegetation such as cattails; sedge tussocks; or bushes; often directly above the water; up to 5' high; perhaps sometimes on the ground. Nest (probably built by female only) often has bulky foundation of coarse grass and other marsh plants; with inner cup of fine grass. Dead cattail blades or other leaves often arch over the nest; so that the birds must enter from the side. 
Tamaulipas-Crow,Corvus imparatus,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Semi-open country. In Texas; seen mostly in and near the Brownsville garbage dump. In Mexico; found in dry brushland; arid scrub; farms; ranches; towns. Avoids unbroken forest; mountains; and extreme desert situations; and not often found on seashore.,Forages mostly by walking on ground; also probably does some foraging in trees. Except when nesting; usually forages in flocks.,4. Pale blue; streaked with pale olive-buff. Incubation is apparently by female only; 17-18 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Development of young in the wild not well known; may leave the nest roughly 30-35 days after hatching.,Probably omnivorous. Diet not known in detail; but probably like other crows in eating a wide variety of items. Scavenges for refuse; and known to eat carrion; insects; seeds; probably also birds' eggs; berries; nuts; various other things. ,Has only been known to nest a few times in Texas. Breeding behavior is not well known. May nest in loose colonies. Courtship may involve two birds perching close together; touching bills and preening each other's feathers; one bird (male?) may feed the other. Nest site is usually in tree; the first nests found in Texas were built in the open on a framework of steel beams. Both sexes help build nest; a substantial platform or shallow basket of sticks and plant fibers; lined with softer materials. 
Temmincks-Stint,Calidris temminckii,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Tennessee-Warbler,Leiothlypis peregrina,Wood Warblers,Deciduous and mixed forests; in migration; groves; brush. Breeds in bogs; swamps; and forests. Prefers openings in second growth balsam-tamarack bogs; or aspen and pine woods; or edges of dense spruce forest. Nests near slight depressions of boggy ground. During spring migration; mostly high in trees. During fall migration; often lower in saplings; brush; weedy fields.,Forages in the outer foliage of trees; sometimes hanging head downward. Takes insects in dense patches of weeds. In summer; male may feed mostly in treetops; female remaining nearer the ground. Forages in flocks of up to 200 on wintering grounds; often in coffee plantations.,5-6; sometimes 4-7. May lay more eggs during outbreaks of spruce budworm. Eggs white; with some marks of brown or purple. Rarely parasitized by cowbirds. Incubation by female only; 11-12 days. Young: Development and care of the young; and age when they leave the nest; are not well known. Probably 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects; some berries and nectar. In summer feeds mainly on insects; including caterpillars; scale insects; aphids; beetles; flies; ants; leafhoppers; and others; also spiders. Takes nectar from catkins; and some juice from grapes. In winter in the tropics; feeds on nectar; berries; and the protein-rich structures that cecropia trees produce at base of leaves. ,Male has loud repetitious song on breeding territory. In ideal habitat; nests are closely spaced in loose colonies. During courtship; male performs song flight up to 60' above the ground. Nest: Concealed in a depression on ground under bushes or overhanging grass. Site is usually on mossy hummock in a wet area; but will nest on fairly dry ground on steep hillsides. Nest (built by female) is open cup made of thin grass stems; lined with fine dry grass; porcupine quills; or moose hair. 
Terek-Sandpiper,Xenus cinereus,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Thick-billed-Kingbird,Tyrannus crassirostris,Tyrant Flycatchers,Sycamores and cottonwoods along streams. In the United States; breeds along permanent streams in the lowlands and lower canyons; mostly where big sycamores and cottonwoods grow; occasionally in pure stands of cottonwoods. In Mexico; widespread in dry woods and semi-open country in lowlands.,Forages by watching from a perch and flying out to capture insects; returning to perch to eat them. Captures most prey in mid-air; often in long; swooping flights. Usually hunts from high perches near tops of trees; but will forage low; especially in cool weather.,3-4. Whitish; blotched with brown. Details of incubation not well known. Young: Both parents bring food for young in nest. Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Insects. Diet is not well known; but probably is mostly or entirely insects. Large bill size suggests the ability to feed on very large insects; has been seen eating large beetles; cicadas; and others. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Aggressive in defense of nesting territory; attacking larger birds that come near nest. Both members of mated pairs often perch close together; quivering wings and calling loudly. Nest site is usually high in tall tree (in Arizona; typically in sycamore; sometimes in cottonwood); 50-80' above the ground. Nest is a large but loosely built open cup of twigs; grasses; weeds; leaves; plant down. Nest has a ragged look; with twigs sticking out in all directions; from below; eggs may be visible through bottom of nest. 
Thick-billed-Murre,Uria lomvia,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; nesting colonially on ledges of sea cliffs. Favors very cold ocean waters of Arctic; when not nesting; often very far from land over deep waters. May associate with edges or openings in pack ice. Nests on rocky coasts or islands with steep cliffs.,Forages while swimming underwater. May dive to more than 200' below surface.,One. Very variable; usually whitish; tan; blue; or green; with markings of brown and black. Incubation is by both sexes; 30-35 days. One parent is almost always at nest throughout nesting cycle. Young: Fed by both parents. Adults often forage many miles away from colony. Young leaves nest at 15-30 days; before able to fly; glides down to sea; accompanied by adult male. Young evidently is accompanied and cared for by male for several weeks after leaving nest.,Mostly fish. Diet is primarily fish in summer (and young are fed almost entirely on fish); may include more crustaceans in winter. Fish in diet include cod; herring; capelin; sand lance; sculpin; many others. Crustaceans eaten include shrimp; amphipods; mysids; copepods. Also eats some marine worms; squid. ,Probably older than 3 years at first breeding. Nests in colonies; some very large. Some pair formation may occur before arrival at colony. At nest site; members of pair bow; nibble at each other's bills; may pick up pebbles and present them to each other. Nest site is on cliff ledge; may use narrower and smaller ledges than Common Murre. No nest; egg laid on bare rock. 
Thick-billed-Parrot,Rhynchopsitta pachyrhyncha,African and New World Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Thick-billed-Vireo,Vireo crassirostris,Vireos,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Townsends-Solitaire,Myadestes townsendi,Thrushes,Conifer forests in mountains; rocky cliffs; in winter; chaparral; pinyon-juniper; open woods; wooded streams. Breeds mostly in open conifer forest in mountains; where exposed rocky slopes or dirt banks provide nesting sites; in far north; may be in burned areas or open scrub habitat near such banks. In winter; inhabits semi-open woods and brush; especially around junipers.,Does much foraging by watching from a perch; then flying out to catch insects in mid-air or fluttering down to catch them on the ground. Also may hover momentarily while plucking insects or berries among foliage.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 6. Whitish to pale blue; blotched with pale gray; overlaid with darker brown spots. Details of incubation not well known; incubation period about 11 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young probably leave the nest about 2 weeks after hatching.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including caterpillars; beetles; ants; true bugs; and others; also spiders and other invertebrates. In winter; majority of diet may be berries and small fruits; including those of juniper; mistletoe; hackberry; and others. ,Male defends territory by singing; often from a high perch; sometimes sings in flight. Nest: Usually on ground in shallow depression in dirt bank or road cut; in crevice in cliff; under a log or stump; or among upturned roots; placed in a protected spot with some overhanging shelter. Sometimes in hollow in dead snag a few feet above ground. Nest is a bulky and loosely made open cup of twigs; grass; pine needles; bark strips; lined with finer grass. 
Townsends-Warbler,Setophaga townsendi,Wood Warblers,Tall conifers; cool fir forests; in winter; also oaks; madrones; laurels. Breeds in tall; dense coniferous forest of the Pacific Northwest; both in the humid coastal belt and in the mountains. In winter in the tropics; found mostly in mountain forests of pine; oak; and alder. Along California coast; winters in oak woods and in conifers. Migrants occur in mountain conifer forests and in streamside trees in lowlands.,Forages mostly in higher parts of trees. Searches actively among twigs for insects; often hovering briefly to take items from foliage. Sometimes flies out to catch flying insects in the air. Except in nesting season; often feeds in mixed flocks with other warblers and other small birds.,At least 3; commonly 4-5. White with brown marks. Details of incubation not well known; may be incubated by both sexes; estimated at about 12 days. Young: Nestlings are fed by female and possibly by male. Young leave the nest about 8-10 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. While nesting; eats mainly insects; such as caterpillars; true bugs; beetles; leafhoppers; and many others; also a few spiders; seeds; and plant galls. On tropical wintering grounds; also feeds on some berries and nectar. ,Males arrive on breeding grounds in late May; and establish territories by singing. The first eggs are laid by late June. Nest: Placed directly on top of branch; usually towards the ends of horizontal conifer branches; 7'-60' above the ground. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a large shallow cup of grass stems; mosses; cedar bark; and fir twigs; lined with moss; feathers; and hair. 
Tree-Swallow,Tachycineta bicolor,Swallows,Open country near water; marshes; meadows; lakes. May breed in any kind of open or semi-open area that provides both nesting sites and a good supply of flying insects. Typically breeds close to water; as around ponds or marshes; but also nests away from water around meadows or brushy areas. In winter; mainly around marshes and near bayberry thickets along coast.,Forages mostly in flight; often low over water or fields. May pick items from surface of water while flying. Perches in bushes to eat berries; and sometimes feeds on ground; especially in cold weather.,4-7; sometimes 2-8. Very pale pink at first; fading to white. Incubation is by female only; usually 14-15 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; and female broods them while they are small. Young usually leave the nest about 18-22 days after hatching.,Mostly insects; some berries. Diet is mostly insects; especially in summer. Feeds on many flies; beetles; winged ants; and others. Also eats some spiders; and will eat sand fleas (which are crustaceans). Unlike our other swallows; eats much vegetable material (up to 20% of annual diet; mostly eaten in winter). Bayberries are main plant food; also eats other berries and seeds. ,Male arrives on nesting territory before female; courtship involves male showing female potential nesting sites. Birds often choose new mates each year. Nest: Natural nest sites are in holes in dead trees; or in old sapsucker holes in live trees; also very frequently uses nest boxes. Sometimes in odd sites such as holes in buildings; old Cliff Swallow nests; or holes in ground. Nest (built mostly by female) is cup of grass; weeds; rootlets; moss; pine needles; other plant materials. Usually lined with many feathers (from other kinds of birds); mostly added after first eggs are laid. 
Tricolored-Blackbird,Agelaius tricolor,Blackbirds and Orioles,Cattail or tule marshes; forages in fields; farms. Breeds in large freshwater marshes; in dense stands of cattails or bulrushes. At all seasons (including when breeding); does most of its foraging in open habitats such as farm fields; pastures; cattle pens; large lawns.,Forages mostly while walking on ground; also sometimes up in shrubs and trees. Usually forages in flocks; particularly outside the breeding season; often associated with Red-winged Blackbirds; other blackbirds; and starlings.,4; sometimes 3-5; rarely 2-6. Pale blue-green; with markings of black; brown; and purple concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 11 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings (but female does more). Young leave the nest about 11-14 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including caterpillars; beetles; grasshoppers; and others; also spiders. Especially in fall and winter; eats many seeds of grasses and weeds; and waste grain. ,Nests in colonies; more densely packed than Red-winged Blackbirds; with nests often only a couple of feet apart. In displaying to attract a mate; male perches on high stalk with feathers fluffed out and tail partly spread; lifts leading edge of wing so that red shoulder patches are prominent; lowers head; and sings. Nest: Placed in marsh in cattails or bulrushes; or in willows at water's edge; sometimes in tall growth in drier fields. Nest (built by female) is bulky open cup; lashed to standing vegetation; made of grass; reeds; leaves; rootlets; lined with fine grass. 
Tricolored-Heron,Egretta tricolor,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Marshes; swamps; streams; shores. Mainly in waters of coastal lowlands. In breeding season usually near salt water; on shallow; sheltered estuaries and bays; tidal marshes; mangrove swamps. Also locally inland around freshwater marshes; lakes; rivers. Nests in colonies in trees; mangroves; or scrub near water.,Forages in shallow water by standing still and waiting for prey to approach; or by walking very slowly; sometimes more active; stirring bottom sediments with one foot; or dashing in pursuit of schools of fish. Solitary in foraging; driving away others from small "feeding territory.",3-4; sometimes 2-7. Pale blue-green. Incubation is by both sexes; 21-25 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. Young may begin climbing about near nest at age of 3 weeks; able to fly at about 5 weeks.,Mostly fish. Eats mainly small fish of no economic value; also crustaceans (crayfish; prawns); insects (aquatic insects and grasshoppers); tadpoles; frogs; salamanders; lizards; spiders. ,Breeds in colonies; often with other species of wading birds. Male selects site within colony and displays there to attract mate. Displays include neck stretching; deep bowing; circular display flights. Nest:  Site depends on colony location; which may be in trees; mangroves; willows; thickets of dry scrub; sometimes on ground; nest usually 2-10' above ground; sometimes up to 30'. Nest (built mostly by female; with materials gathered by male) is a platform of sticks; with a shallow depression at center; lined with finer twigs and grasses. 
Tropical-Kingbird,Tyrannus melancholicus,Tyrant Flycatchers,River groves; scattered trees. Breeding habitat in Arizona is in groves of cottonwoods near water at low elevations. Farther south in the tropics; found in any kind of open or semi-open habitat; from savannahs and farms to towns and cities.,From a perch on a tree; wire; fence; etc.; the bird sallies out to capture insects in flight; also hovers and drops to ground for insects there.,3-4; sometimes 5. Creamy buff or pinkish; with blotching of brown and purple often concentrated at large end. Incubation is by female only; about 15-16 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Young leave the nest about 18-19 days after hatching. Apparently just 1 brood per year in United States part of range.,Mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; but feeds mostly on insects; including beetles; flies; grasshoppers; and many others. In the tropics; also eats many berries and small fruits. One Costa Rica study found that it rarely also eats small frogs. ,Both parents may chase away larger birds from vicinity of nest; but often seem to tolerate other kingbirds (Western and Cassin's) near nest tree in Arizona; 3 species of kingbirds may nest in same grove of trees. Nest: Placed on horizontal branch or in fork of tree; 6-40' above the ground; usually lower than 25'. Nest (built by female) is a shallow cup of twigs; grasses; stems; bark; plant fibers; lined with plant down; moss; other fine materials. 
Tropical-Parula,Setophaga pitiayumi,Wood Warblers,Oaks; riverside woods. In southern Texas; breeds mainly in groves of low live oaks with much Spanish moss (for nest sites); surrounded by mesquites. Also sometimes in dense native woods near Rio Grande where much Spanish moss hangs in trees. In the tropics; nests in many kinds of woodlands; from dry lowland thorn forest to humid forest in the mountains.,Forages actively from mid-level to the treetops; frequently along streams. Searches among leaves; and hovers momentarily to take insects from foliage; sometimes flies out to catch flying insects in mid-air.,Usually 3-4 in south Texas; 2 in the tropics. Creamy white with chestnut speckles around larger end. The incubation period and the roles of the parents are not well known. Young: Probably both parents feed the nestlings. Age at which the young leave the nest is not well known.,Largely insects. Diet not known in detail; undoubtedly feeds mostly on insects. Known to feed on wasps; ants; flies; and others. ,Details are not well known. In the tropics; may remain paired on territory throughout the year. In Texas; most apparently depart in winter. After returning in spring; males sing persistently to defend territory. Nest: Placed 8-40' above ground in hanging Spanish moss; sometimes in hollow in orchids or dangling cactus. In Spanish moss; little material may be added. In other sites; nest is cup-shaped and constructed of moss; palmetto bark; grass; roots; and animal hair; lined with plant down and feathers. Nest probably built by female. 
Trumpeter-Swan,Cygnus buccinator,Ducks and Geese,Lakes; ponds; large rivers; in winter; also bays. Favors large but shallow freshwater ponds; or wide; slow-flowing rivers; with lots of vegetation. Most of current range is in forested regions; but at one time was also common on northern prairies.,Takes food from underwater; or on or above water's surface; sometimes on land; especially in winter. To forage in deeper water; swans upend with tail up and neck extending straight down; finding food by touch with bill.,4-6; up to 9. Whitish; becoming nest-stained. Female does most of incubating but male often does some; eggs hatch in 32-37 days. Young: can swim when less than 1 day old. Both adults tend young; leading them to feeding sites. Young are not fully capable of flight until 3-4 months after hatching.,Mostly plant material. Adults eat mainly stems; leaves; and roots of aquatic plants; including pondweed; sedges; rushes; arrowleaf; wild celery; bulrush; burreed; and many others. May eat terrestrial grasses and waste crops in winter. Young eat many insects and other small invertebrates; mainly during first 2 weeks after hatching. ,Usually forms pairs at age 2-4 years; but nests for first time at age 4-7 years. Often mates for life. Nest site is surrounded by water; as on small island; beaver or muskrat house; floating platform. Nest (built by both sexes; although female may do most of work) is a low mound of plant material; several feet in diameter; with a depressed bowl in the center. Same nest may be used in subsequent years. 
Tufted-Duck,Aythya fuligula,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Tufted-Flycatcher,Mitrephanes phaeocercus,Tyrant Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Tufted-Puffin,Fratercula cirrhata,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; nesting colonially in burrows on sea cliffs. Ranges widely at sea; from fairly near shore to far out of sight of land. Even during breeding season; may be at sea far from nesting colonies. Nests on islands; primarily on grassy steep slopes or cliff tops (steep dropoff may help birds take flight). Throughout range; prefers treeless islands.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; using wings to "fly" through the depths; with tail spread and feet back to aid with steering. Swims rapidly through schools of small fish; catching them in bill.,one. Dull white to bluish-white; often spotted with gray and brown. Incubation is by both sexes; about 40-42 days. Young: both parents feed nestling; carrying fish in bill and dropping them on ground in nest or near entrance. Tufted Puffin may forage farther from colony than Horned Puffin; and sometimes 1-2 days pass between feeding visits to nest. Young leave nest about 6-7 weeks after hatching. 1 brood per year; or 2 possibly in south.,Mostly fish. Feeds mainly on small fish; especially sand lance and capelin; also small squid; and miscellaneous fish such as saury; rockfish; smelt. Reported to eat some crustaceans; mollusks; sea urchins; small amounts of algae. ,Breeds in colonies on islands; active at colonies by day. Nest site in burrow; mostly in grassy areas on slopes or cliffs. Sometimes in deep natural crevice among rocks; or on ground under shrubs. Burrows (excavated by both sexes) usually 2-7' long; occasionally longer. Nest chamber at end of burrow may have lining of grass; feathers; or may be unlined. 
Tufted-Titmouse,Baeolophus bicolor,Chickadees and Titmice,Woodlands; shade trees; groves. Mostly in deciduous forest with tall trees; sometimes in mixed forest. Can live in orchards; suburbs; or even city parks if trees are large enough.,Forages by hopping actively among branches and twigs of trees; often hanging upside down; sometimes hovering momentarily. Often drops to the ground for food as well. Comes to bird feeders for seeds or suet. Opens acorns and seeds by holding them with feet and pounding with bill. Will store food items; retrieving them later.,5-6; sometimes 3-9. White; finely dotted with brown; reddish; or purple. Incubation is by female only; 12-14 days. Young: Female stays with young much of time at first; while male brings food; later; young are fed by both parents; sometimes by additional helper. Young leave nest about 15-16 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and seeds. Insects make up close to two-thirds of annual diet; with caterpillars the most important prey in summer; also eats wasps; bees; sawfly larvae; beetles; true bugs; scale insects; and many others; including many insect eggs and pupae. Also eats some spiders; snails. Seeds; nuts; berries; and small fruits are important in diet especially in winter. ,Pairs may remain together all year; joining small flocks with other titmice in winter. Flocks break up in late winter; and pairs establish nesting territories. Male feeds female often from courtship stage until after eggs hatch. Breeding pair may have a "helper;" one of their offspring from the previous year. Nest site is in hole in tree; either natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; averages about 35' above the ground; ranging from 3' to 90' up. Unlike the chickadees; apparently does not excavate its own nest hole. Will also use nest boxes. Nest (probably built by female) has foundation of grass; moss; leaves; bark strips; lined with soft materials; especially animal hair. Bird may pluck hair from live woodchuck; dog; or other animal; even from humans. 
Tundra-Swan,Cygnus columbianus,Ducks and Geese,Tundra (summer); lakes; large rivers; bays; estuaries; flooded fields. In summer on northern tundra with many lakes and ponds; generally near the coast. During migration and winter mainly on shallow lakes; wide slow-moving rivers; and coastal estuaries; especially those with agricultural fields nearby.,in nesting season forages mainly in water by dabbling at surface; dipping head underwater; or upending with tail up and head straight down (can reach 3 feet below surface). On migration and in winter does much feeding on land in open fields. Sometimes feeds during moonlit nights.,4-5; up to 7. Creamy white; becoming stained. Female does about 3/4 of incubating; male does rest; eggs hatch in 31-32 days. Young: Both parents tend young; leading them to feeding sites in water. Adults may paddle with feet to bring submerged food to surface for young; may rarely feed young directly. Young fledge in 2-3 months; remain with parents at least through first winter.,seeds and other plant material. Summer diet mainly stems; seeds; and roots of aquatic plants; including sedges; pondweeds; arrowleaf; algae; and others; also a few small invertebrates. At other seasons; eats much grain in harvested fields of corn; barley; and soybean. ,In one display involving members of a pair; the birds face each other; wings partly spread and rapidly quivering; while they call loudly. Nest site is near lake or other open water; on ridge or island with good visibility. Nest (built by both sexes) is low mound of plant material; 1 or 2 feet in diameter; with a depression in the center; may be used for more than 1 year. 
Turkey-Vulture,Cathartes aura,New World Vultures,Widespread over open country; woods; deserts; foothills. Most common over open or semi-open country; especially within a few miles of rocky or wooded areas providing secure nesting sites. Generally avoids densely forested regions. Unlike Black Vulture; regularly forages over small offshore islands.,Seeks carrion by soaring over open or partly wooded country; watching the ground and watching the actions of other scavengers. Can also locate some carrion by odor: Unlike most birds; has a well-developed sense of smell.,2; sometimes 1; rarely 3. Whitish; blotched with brown and lavender. Incubation is by both parents; usually 34-41 days. Young: One parent remains with young much of time at first. Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. If young are approached in nest; they defend themselves by hissing and regurgitating. Age of young at first flight about 9-10 weeks.,Mostly carrion. Feeds mainly on dead animals; preferring those recently dead (that is; relatively fresh carrion). Occasionally feeds on decaying vegetable matter; live insects; or live fish in drying-up ponds. ,As a part of pair formation; several birds gather in circle on ground; and perform ritualized hopping movements around perimeter of circle with wings partly spread. In the air; one bird may closely follow another; the two birds flapping and diving. Nest sites are in sheltered areas; such as inside hollow trees or logs; in crevices in cliffs; under rocks; in caves; inside dense thickets; or in old buildings. Little or no nest built; eggs laid on debris or on flat bottom of nest site. 
Upland-Sandpiper,Bartramia longicauda,Sandpipers,Grassy prairies; open meadows; fields. Favored nesting habitat is native grassland; with mixture of tall grass and broad-leafed weeds. In the northeast; where natural grassland is now scarce; may be found most often on airports. In migration; stops on open pastures; lawns. Almost never on mudflats or other typical shorebird habitats.,Forages by walking through the grass; with rather abrupt or jerky movements; picking up items from ground or from vegetation.,4. Pale buff to pinkish-buff; lightly spotted with reddish-brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 22-27 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young; but young feed themselves. If nest or young are threatened; adults perform distraction display to lead predators away. Age of young at first flight about 30-31 days.,Mostly insects; some seeds. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including many grasshoppers; crickets; beetles and their larvae; moth caterpillars; and many others; also spiders; centipedes; earthworms; snails. Also eats some seeds of grasses and weeds; and waste grain in fields. ,Male displays over breeding territory in song-flight; with shallow; fluttering wingbeats and drawn-out whistles; often very high above the ground. May nest in loose colonies; with all the pairs in a local area going through stages of nesting (egg-laying; hatching; etc.) at almost exactly the same time. Nest site is on ground among dense grass; typically well hidden; with grass arched above it. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is shallow scrape on ground; lined with dry grass. 
Varied-Bunting,Passerina versicolor,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Streamside thickets; brush. In United states found mostly in areas of dense thorny brush; often with an upper story of scattered trees. Prime habitat is usually in canyons and along streams; but in some areas may be in flat desert away from water if brush is dense.,Forages at various levels from ground up into shrubs and trees. Probably takes insects from leaves; seeds from ground or stems; berries from shrubs. Forages alone in summer; but may gather in small flocks in winter.,4; sometimes 3; rarely 5. White to bluish-white; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; about 12-13 days. Young: Fed by both parents; leaving nest after about 12 days. For a few days after fledging; brood may split; 2 young going with female and 2 with male; then male may take over care of all young while female starts another nesting attempt. Often 2 broods per year; perhaps sometimes 3.,Probably seeds and insects. Diet poorly known. In breeding season probably feeds mostly on insects; also some seeds; berries. Food brought to young at nest is mostly insects. Winter diet probably includes more seeds. ,Nests mostly in late summer in Arizona (after summer rains begin); in early summer in Texas. Male defends territory with song; and with fluttering flight display directed at intruding males. Nest site is in dense shrub; low tree; or vine; usually 2-5' above ground; sometimes up to 12'. Nest (built by both parents) is compact open cup; mostly of dry grass and weeds; lined with finer materials. 
Varied-Thrush,Ixoreus naevius,Thrushes,Thick; wet forest; conifers; in winter; woods; ravines; thickets. Breeds in coniferous forest of various types; but most common in dense; wet forest near the coast; in areas of fir; hemlock; and spruce with dense understory. In migration and winter favors coniferous woods but also occurs in undergrowth of other woods; especially near streams.,Does much foraging on the ground; usually under dense cover but sometimes on open lawns; may use its bill to toss leaf-litter aside as it searches for insects. Feeds on berries either in trees and shrubs or after they fall to ground.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Pale blue; lightly dotted with brown. Incubation is by female; probably about 2 weeks. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Development of young and age at which they leave the nest are not well known. Probably 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including beetles; ants; caterpillars; crickets; and many others; also eats many millipedes; sowbugs; snails; earthworms; spiders; other invertebrates. Berries and wild fruits make up majority of winter diet; also eats some seeds and acorns. ,Male sings in spring to defend territory; singing most frequently at dawn and dusk and after a rain. Nest: Usually placed in conifer; at base of branches against trunk; 5-15' above the ground. Sites vary: Occasionally much higher; especially in far north; may nest very low in deciduous thickets or on the ground. Nest (probably built by female) is a bulky open cup of twigs; moss; leaves; and bark fibers; lined with softer materials such as grass and rootlets. 
Variegated-Flycatcher,Empidonomus varius,Tyrant Flycatchers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Vauxs-Swift,Chaetura vauxi,Swifts,Open sky over forest; lakes; and rivers. Often feeds low over water; especially in morning and evening or during unsettled weather. Nests in coniferous and mixed forest; mainly old-growth forest; including redwood; Douglas-fir; grand fir. Resident subspecies in the American tropics occur in other habitats; in the Yucatan Peninsula; may nest in wells around Mayan ruins.,Forages in rapid flight; pursuing flying insects and capturing them in wide bill. May forage singly or in flocks. Spiders and sedentary insects in diet may have been captured after being carried high by air currents; or taken from trees by the swifts while hovering briefly in flight.,6; sometimes 3-7. White. Incubation is by both sexes; 18-19 days. Young: Both parents care for and feed young. At some nests; one or two additional adults may help parents incubate eggs and feed nestlings. Feeding visits to nest are frequent: average once every 12-18 minutes; perhaps less often as young get older. Young capable of flight at 28-32 days; may return to roost at nest site for several nights after fledging. One brood per year.,Mostly flying insects. Feeds on a wide variety of flying insects; including flies; winged ants; bees; moths; beetles; mayflies; and others. Also some spiders and flightless insects. ,May nest as solitary pairs or in colonies. Courtship involves much aerial chasing; sometimes gliding with wings up in sharp V. Nest site is usually inside hollow tree; reached via broken-off top or woodpecker hole. Sometimes nests in chimneys. Both sexes gather nest material by breaking off small twigs from trees while flying. Twigs are carried in mouth to nest site; cemented into place with sticky saliva. Nest is a shallow half cup glued to inside wall of tree. 
Veery,Catharus fuscescens,Thrushes,Damp deciduous woods. For breeding; favors dense understory and leafy low growth near water. Surrounding habitat usually deciduous woods; sometimes mixed or coniferous woods; or open country on northern Great Plains. In mature forest; avoids areas with little understory; concentrating along streams or other openings. During migration; found mainly in deciduous woods. Winters in undergrowth of lowland tropical forest.,Forages mostly by hopping about on the ground or in low vegetation. Sometimes flips dead leaves over with bill; often hovers briefly to take insects from foliage; and may make short flights to catch insects in mid-air. Also watches from low perch and drops to ground for items. Feeds on berries up in shrubs and trees.,4; sometimes 3-5. Pale greenish blue; usually unmarked; sometimes spotted with brown. Incubation is apparently by female only; about 10-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; female may spend much time brooding them at first. Young leave nest about 10-12 days after hatching. Some pairs may raise 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Diet is mainly insects during breeding season; including beetles; ants; small wasps; caterpillars; crickets; and others; also spiders; centipedes; snails; rarely eats small frogs or salamanders. Berries and small fruit may be majority of diet in late summer and fall. Winter diet poorly known. ,Male arrives first on breeding grounds and defends nesting territory by singing. Courtship involves male chasing female; both birds calling back and forth. Nest: Typically placed on or near the ground in dense forest. Nests above ground are usually in base of shrub or sapling; less than 5' up; nests on ground are often placed against stump or log; or in clump of grass or weeds. Nest (built by female) has foundation of dead leaves; cup made of weeds; twigs; fine strips of bark; lined with rootlets and bark fibers. 
Verdin,Auriparus flaviceps,Verdins,Brushy desert valleys; mesquites. Most common in Sonoran desert and mesquite woods at lower elevations. Also lives in other kinds of low open brush; including desert stands of acacia and paloverde; thickets of saltcedar; low riverside woods. Common in suburbs of some southwestern towns.,Forages actively in shrubs and low trees; mostly among smaller branches. Takes most of its food from leaf surfaces; sometimes hanging upside down to reach undersides of leaves. Often visits flowers for nectar; and will come to hummingbird feeders for sugar-water. Sometimes catches insects in the air; on the ground; or on the bark of branches.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Pale green to blue-green; with reddish brown dots often concentrated around larger end. Incubation is by female; reportedly about 10 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 21 days after hatching; but continue to return to nest to sleep at night.,Mostly insects. Feeds on many kinds of tiny insects; including aphids; caterpillars; scale insects; leafhoppers; beetle and wasp larvae; and many others. Small spiders are also important in diet. Eats berries; small fruits; and sometimes seeds; regularly takes nectar. ,Male may build several nests; with female choosing one to use for raising the young. Nest: Placed well out on branches of thorny shrub or low tree; or in cholla cactus; usually 4-12' above the ground. Nest is a conspicuous hollow oval or sphere; surprisingly large for size of bird; made of thorny twigs. Entrance is low on one side; interior is well lined with feathers; grass; leaves; spiderwebs; for good insulation. Nests built late in spring tend to have entrance facing toward prevailing wind; may help cool the interior. 
Vermilion-Flycatcher,Pyrocephalus rubinus,Tyrant Flycatchers,Streamsides in arid country; savanna; ranches. In some areas may be found in dry grassland or desert with scattered trees; but much more frequent near water: short trees along streams; edges of ponds. Winter strays in the southeast are in open clearings or brushy areas near water.,Forages by watching for prey from exposed perch; then sallying out to capture flying insects in the air; also by hovering and dropping to the ground for small insects. If beehives are placed close to favored foraging sites; sometimes consumes many bees. Indigestible parts of insects are coughed up later as pellets.,Usually 3; sometimes 2-4. Whitish with bold spots of brown; olive; lavender. Incubation is by the female (the male may rarely take a turn on the nest); 14-15 days. Young: Both parents feed the young. Young fledge in 14-16 days; and male may tend the full-grown young while female begins second nest. 2 broods per year.,Insects. Diet not known in detail; but apparently feeds entirely on insects; including beetles; flies; wasps; grasshoppers; and many others. ,Male performs flight-song display above territory: fluffing out body and head feathers and rising high in air (up to 50' or more) in peculiar fluttering flight while singing rapidly and repeatedly; then swooping back down to perch. Nest: Female builds nest in horizontal fork of tree; usually 6-20' above ground; rarely up to 50' or more. Nest is a compact cup of twigs; grass; weeds; often held together with spider webs and decorated with lichens. Nest lining is of finer plant materials; hair; and feathers. 
Vesper-Sparrow,Pooecetes gramineus,New World Sparrows,Meadows; fields; prairies; roadsides. At all seasons; favors open grassy or weedy fields; often in rather dry situations with much open soil. May be in weedy roadsides; gravel pits; high mountain grasslands; stubble fields; grassy areas just above sandy beaches. Often breeds where there are a few taller plants for use as song perches.,Forages mostly or entirely on the ground; often on bare soil between grass or weed clumps. Except during nesting season; often forages in small; loose flocks.,3-4; sometimes 2-6. Whitish to pale greenish white; blotched with brown and gray. Incubation is mostly by female; about 11-13 days. When disturbed at the nest; the female may flutter away as if injured; perhaps to lure intruders away. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest 1-2 weeks after hatching; usually around 9-10 days. 1-2 broods per year; sometimes 3.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds on many insects; especially in summer; including beetles; grasshoppers; caterpillars; moths; true bugs; and many others; also spiders and other invertebrates. Also eats many seeds; especially in winter; mainly those of weeds and grasses. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing from a prominent raised perch. Courtship may involve male running about on ground near female; with his wings and tail spread; sometimes fluttering into the air. Nest site is on the ground; often in a slight depression and placed at the base of a grass clump; weed; or shrub. Nest is a bulky open cup made of grass and weeds; lined with fine grass; rootlets; animal hair. 
Violet-crowned-Hummingbird,Amazilia violiceps,Hummingbirds,Sycamore groves; canyons; streamsides. In its limited U.S. range; found mostly near groves of tall trees (especially sycamores or cottonwoods) with brushy understory; along lowland streams or lower stretches of canyons.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; probably 2 weeks or more. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and eats many small insects as well. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Has a squeaky song; heard especially at dawn in breeding season. In Arizona; most nesting activity is in mid to late summer. Nest site is in deciduous tree or large shrub; placed on horizontal limb or in forked twig; often about 20 feet up. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of grasses; plant fibers; spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged with bits of lichen or twigs. 
Violet-green-Swallow,Tachycineta thalassina,Swallows,Widespread when foraging; nests in open forests; mountains; towns. During migration; often near water; as along rivers; lakes; coastline. Wide range of nesting habitats; mainly in semi-open situations; including aspen groves; pine forest; canyon walls; sometimes open prairie if nest sites exist. In Mexico; also in low desert; nesting in holes in giant cactus.,Forages in flight; catching insects in the air. Often flies higher than other swallows; although it will feed low over ponds; especially in bad weather. Usually forages in flocks; may associate with other swallows or with White-throated Swifts.,4-6; rarely 7. White. Incubation is evidently mostly or entirely by the female; about 13-18 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; but female often does more. Young leave the nest about 23-24 days after hatching. Parents continue to feed the young for some time after they leave the nest. 1 brood per year; perhaps sometimes 2.,Insects. Feeds on a wide variety of flying insects; such as flies; true bugs; wasps; winged ants; wild bees; beetles; moths; and many others. ,May nest in isolated pairs or in small colonies. Nest site is in a cavity; usually an old woodpecker hole or natural cavity in tree; sometimes in hole or crevice in rock. Will use birdhouses. In northwestern Mexico; will nest in holes in giant cactus. Nest (built by both sexes; with female doing most of work) is a cup of grass; twigs; rootlets; lined with many feathers. 
Vireo-Gorra-Negra,Vireo atricapilla,Vireos,Matorrales de roble; lomas cubiertas con maleza; caones rocosos. Se reproduce en las laderas secas clidas con matorrales densos de arbustos; en especial; en encinillos con numerosas aberturas o huecos en vez de una cubierta slida. Inverna en Mxico en matorrales densos y lmites de bosques; sobre todo en colinas y tierras bajas.,Forrajea en forma ms activa que la mayora de los vireos; movindose entre las ramas grandes y pequeas de la vegetacin frondosa; y a veces se cuelga cabeza abajo como un carbonero para conseguir alimentos en la parte oculta del follaje.,3 o 4; muy pocas veces entre 2 y 5. De color blanco; sin marcas (la mayora de los otros vireos ponen huevos manchados). Ambos padres se encargan de la incubacin durante alrededor de 15 das; perodo increblemente largo para un ave de tamao tan pequeo.,En su mayora; insectos; y algunas bayas. En el verano; se alimenta principalmente de insectos; su dieta no se conoce bien; pero come muchas orugas; escarabajos; pequeos saltamontes; grillos y otros; as como tambin araas. Tambin ingiere algunas bayas y frutos pequeos. No se conoce bien su dieta de invierno; pero puede incluir ms bayas.,El macho defiende el territorio cantando con frecuencia durante gran parte de la poca de reproduccin. Durante el cortejo; el macho canta mientras persigue a la hembra; tambin puede cantar en vuelos cortos. Nido: Lo construye sobre un encinillo bajo o en algn otro arbusto denso; normalmente a entre 60 cm y 2 metros del suelo; y rara vez; a mayor altura. Ambos padres ayudan a construir el nido; una pequea copa colgante suspendida en la bifurcacin horizontal de una rama pequea. El nido est hecho de csped; tiras de corteza; maleza y hojas; unidos entre s con tela de araa; la parte interna est revestida con hierbas finas.
Virginia-Rail,Rallus limicola,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Fresh and brackish marshes; in winter; also salt marshes. Nests in a variety of marshy situations; mostly fresh; but also brackish marsh near coast. Where this species and Sora breed in same marshes; Virginia Rail typically places its nest in drier spots. Often moves into salt marshes in winter. During migration; sometimes found in odd spots; even city streets.,Forages by probing in mud or shallow water; picking items from ground or from plants; or stalking small creatures and capturing them with a swift thrust of the bill.,5-13. Pale buff; lightly spotted with brown and gray. Incubation is by both parents; about 18-20 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents feed young and brood them while they are small. Family remains on breeding territory until chicks are full-grown; then adults may depart; while young remain. Chicks are fed by parents until they are 2-3 weeks old; then become independent; are able to fly at about 25 days.,Mostly insects; crayfish; snails; some seeds. Feeds on a wide variety of aquatic insects and their larvae; especially beetles; flies; dragonflies; many others. Also eats crayfish; earthworms; snails; slugs; a few small fish. Seeds may be important in diet at times. ,In courtship; male runs back and forth near female with wings raised; male and female both make bowing motions; male feeds female. Nest site is in marsh; in dry area or over very shallow water; placed a few inches up in dense clump of vegetation. Nest (built by both sexes) is platform of cattails; reeds; grasses; usually with living plants forming a canopy over it. 
Virginias-Warbler,Leiothlypis virginiae,Wood Warblers,Oak canyons; brushy slopes; pinyons. Breeds on dry mountainsides in scrub oak; chaparral; pinyon-juniper woods; or other low brushy habitats. In some areas; prefers mountain mahogany and Gambel oak. In migration; frequently in woods along streams. In winter in Mexico; at mid-elevations in dry scrub.,During the breeding season; forages mostly by taking insects among foliage and twigs. Also observed feeding on the ground; and catching flying insects in mid-air. May do much probing of buds and flowers. In winter in Mexico; feeds low; mostly within 15' of the ground.,4; sometimes 3-5. White to creamy with fine reddish brown spots. Incubation probably by female. Eggs and young frequently fall prey to jays or snakes. Apparently nests are only rarely parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Fed by both parents. Age at leaving nest is not well known. Possibly 2 broods per year.,Presumably mostly insects. Diet is not known in detail; presumed to eat a wide variety of small insects; like other warblers. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Arriving on breeding grounds in April and early May; the male sings from perches on exposed dead limbs. Pairs begin nesting by early June. Males defend large territories. Nest: Usually very difficult to find. Placed under grass tufts in hollow of decaying leaves on ground covered by dense brush. Frequently on steep hillside or talus slope. Nest (probably built by female) is open cup of coarse grass; bark strips; roots; and moss; lined with animal hair and moss. 
Wandering-Tattler,Tringa incana,Sandpipers,Rock coasts; pebbly beaches. Nests near mountain streams above timberline. In migration and winter usually on rocky coastline or similar areas; such as rock jetties or breakwaters. Occasionally feeds on nearby mudflats or sand beaches. In breeding season; found along rocky or gravelly streams in northern mountains.,Forages more actively than other shorebirds of rocky coasts; moving about quickly over rocks; picking items from surface. Also probes among rocks or in mats of algae. On  breeding grounds; forages by walking or wading along mountain streams.,Usually 4. Olive to green; heavily blotched with brown. Incubation is by both parents; about 23-25 days. The incubating adult may sit motionless on the nest even when approached very closely. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend the young at first; but after 1-2 weeks usually only one adult is present. Young feed themselves; following parents along edge of stream; young can swim well even when small. Age at first flight not well known.,Includes insects; crustaceans; mollusks. On northern breeding grounds; feeds on insects; including flies; beetles; and caddisflies; also amphipods and small mollusks. During migration and winter; eats a variety of mollusks; marine worms; crabs and other crustaceans; and other invertebrates. ,Early in breeding season; male displays over nesting habitat with high flight; giving whistled song; flight path is long and straight; may extend well beyond limits of nesting territory. Nest site is on ground among rocks or gravel near mountain stream. Nest is shallow depression; may be unlined; or may have substantial lining of small twigs; rootlets; and dry leaves. 
Warbling-Vireo,Vireo gilvus,Vireos,Deciduous and mixed woods; aspen groves; poplars; shade trees. Breeds in open deciduous or mixed woodland; also in orchards; shade trees of towns. Avoids unbroken mature forest. In the East; often in isolated groves near water. In the West; breeds in broad-leaved trees of mountains; canyons; and prairie groves. Winters in the tropics in open woods.,Forages mostly in deciduous trees; sometimes in shrubs; hopping along twigs and searching for insects among the leaves. also picks insects off the undersides of leaves while hovering briefly.,4; sometimes 3-5. White with brown or black specks. Incubation is by both parents; 12-14 days. Male frequently sings from nest while incubating. Commonly parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Nestlings are fed and brooded by both parents; leave the nest 12-16 days after hatching.,Mostly insects; some berries. In breeding season feeds mainly on insects; including many caterpillars; plus aphids; beetles; grasshoppers; ants; bugs; scale insects; flies; dragonflies; also eats some spiders and snails. Takes berries and small fruit from bunchberry; dogwood; pokeweed; sumac; elderberry; poison-oak; and many other plants; especially in late summer and fall. ,Male defends territory by singing. In courtship; male struts and hops around female with his wings spread and tail fanned; usually not far from potential nest site. Nest: In the East; usually placed high in tree; up to 90'. In the West; often found in shrub or tree within 30' of ground. Generally deciduous tree or shrub. Nest (built by both sexes) is a compact; deep cup; suspended by its rim from a forked twig. Nest made of bark strips; grass; leaves; and plant fibers. 
Wedge-rumped-Storm-petrel,Oceanodroma tethys,Northern Storm-Petrels,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Wedge-tailed-Shearwater,Ardenna pacifica,Shearwaters and Petrels,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Western-Bluebird,Sialia mexicana,Thrushes,Scattered trees; open conifer forests; farms; in winter; semi-open terrain; brush; deserts. Breeds in semi-open areas including pine woods; oak woods; streamside groves; ranch country; sometimes in pinyon-juniper woods; but avoiding hot dry regions. Winters in many kinds of open or semi-open habitats; especially in pinyon-juniper; also in desert; farmland; others.,Often forages by perching fairly low and flying down to ground to capture insects; sometimes hovering briefly before pouncing. May catch insects in mid-air; or may seek them among foliage. Perches or flutters among branches to take berries.,4-6; sometimes 3-8. Pale blue; unmarked; occasionally white. Incubation is by female; incubation period not well known. Young: Both parents bring food to nestlings. Age of young at first flight is not well known; probably between 2 and 3 weeks. Probably 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Insects make up majority of diet; especially in summer; feeds heavily on grasshoppers; caterpillars; beetles; ants; also many other insects. Berries and small fruits are important in diet especially in winter; among those eaten are fruits of mistletoe; juniper; and elderberry. ,Male typically arrives on breeding grounds before female; and defends nesting territory by singing. In courtship; male may flutter in front of female with wings and tail partly spread; while singing. Male may also feed female. Nest site is in cavity; such as natural hollow in oak or pine; old woodpecker hole; birdhouse; sometimes hole in building. Usually nests fairly low; rarely up to 50' above the ground. Nest in cavity is probably built mostly by female; but male may take part. Nest is a rather loose cup of twigs and weeds; lined with finer grass. 
Western-Grebe,Aechmophorus occidentalis,Grebes,Rushy lakes; sloughs; in winter; bays; ocean. Summers mainly on fresh water lakes with large areas of both open water and marsh vegetation; rarely on tidal marshes. Winters mainly on sheltered bays or estuaries on coast; also on large fresh water lakes; rarely on rivers.,Forages by diving from surface and swimming underwater; propelled mainly by feet. Western and Clark's are only grebes having structure in neck allowing rapid spear-like thrusting of bill; may be useful in spearing fish; but use of this behavior is not well known.,2-4; rarely 1-6. Pale bluish white; becoming nest-stained brown. Incubation by both sexes; about 24 days. Hatching not synchronized; last egg may be abandoned in nest. Young:  Climb onto back of parent within minutes after hatching; soon leave nest; are fed by both parents. Patch of bare yellow skin on head of young turns scarlet when young beg for food or are separated from parents. Age at first flight about 10 weeks. One brood per year.,Mostly fish. Apparently feeds mainly on fish at all seasons and in all habitats. Also known to eat crustaceans; insects; polychaete worms; salamanders. Like other grebes; also eats feathers. ,Breeds in colonies. Courtship displays elaborate and complex. Most conspicuous is a display in which two (or more) irds rear up to upright posture and rush across surface of water side by side; with loud pattering of feet; diving underwater at end of rush; other displays include "dancing" on water with bits of weed held in bill. Nest:  Site is in shallow water marsh. Nest (built by both sexes) a floating heap of plant material; anchored to standing vegetation. 
Western-Gull,Larus occidentalis,Gulls and Terns,Coastal waters; estuaries; beaches; city waterfronts. Mostly along immediate coast; but regularly found well out at sea; especially between coast and nesting islands. Visits garbage dumps; ponds; and flat open areas (such as parking lots) within a few miles of coast; but almost never found farther inland. Nests on islands and locally on mainland cliffs.,forages while walking or swimming; or may plunge into water from flight. May drop hard-shelled clams and crabs onto rocks while in flight to break them open.,Usually 3; sometimes 1-5; rarely 6. Clutches of more than 3 eggs result from 2 females laying in same nest; which happens fairly often at some colonies. Eggs buff to olive or gray; blotched with darker brown. Incubation at normal nests is by both parents (female may do more); 25-29 days. In very hot weather; adults may fly to water and soak belly feathers to cool eggs. Young: Fed by both parents. May leave nest when a few days old and hide in nearby vegetation. Capable of flight at about 6-7 weeks after hatching. Young depart from some colonies at about 10 weeks; becoming independent then; at other colonies; young may be fed by parents longer.,Fish and other marine life; eggs; carrion; refuse. Feeds on a wide variety of aquatic life; including fish; crabs; squid; clams; sea urchins. Eats eggs and young (and sometimes adults) of other birds. Around sea lion colonies; scavenges dead pups and afterbirth. Also eats other carrion; and scavenges in dumps and around docks for refuse. ,First breeds at 4 years or older. Nests in colonies. Nest site is on ground or on cliff ledge; sometimes on boat or building; sometimes under overhanging rock. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is shallow depression; usually with lining of grass; other plants. 
Western-Kingbird,Tyrannus verticalis,Tyrant Flycatchers,Semi-open country; farms; roadsides; towns. Breeds in open terrain with trees to provide nest sites; may be in farmland; groves or streamside trees in prairie country; semi-desert scrub; avoids true desert. Also in towns; where trees are lacking; will nest on artificial structures. Where ranges overlap; typically in more open country than Eastern or Cassin's kingbirds.,Forages mostly by watching from a perch and then flying out to snap up insects in its bill. May perch low or high; may catch insects in mid-air; or may hover and then drop to the ground to catch them.,3-5; rarely up to 7. Whitish; heavily blotched with brown; lavender; and black. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; about 18-19 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 16-17 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; especially wasps; bees; beetles; and grasshoppers; also flies; true bugs; caterpillars; moths; and many others. Also eats some spiders and millipedes; and regularly eats small numbers of berries and fruits. ,Male defends territory by singing; giving "dawn song" incessantly at first hint of daylight. In courtship; male performs flight display; rapidly flying up and down in vertical zigzags; giving rapid sputtering calls. Nest site varies; usually in tree in vertical fork or on horizontal limb; 15-30' above ground. Also often nests on utility poles; sometimes on building ledges or towers; in empty sheds; on cliff ledges; or in abandoned nests of other birds. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a cup of grass; weeds; twigs; plant fibers; lined with finer materials such as feathers; plant down; animal hair; bits of paper. 
Western-Meadowlark,Sturnella neglecta,Blackbirds and Orioles,Grasslands; cultivated fields and pastures; meadows; prairies. Breeds mostly in natural grasslands; abandoned weedy fields; rangeland; also sometimes on cultivated land. In the Midwest; seems to prefer shorter grass and drier fields than the sites chosen by Eastern Meadowlark. In winter; often in stubble fields and other farmland.,Forages by walking on the ground; taking insects and seeds from the ground and from low plants. Often probes in the soil with its bill. In winter; usually forages in flocks.,3-7; usually about 5. White; heavily spotted with brown and purple; especially at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 13-15 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings (but female does more). Young leave the nest after about 12 days; before they are able to fly; and are tended by parents for at least another 2 weeks. 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and seeds. Majority of diet consists of insects; especially in summer; when it eats many beetles; grasshoppers; crickets; caterpillars; ants; true bugs; and others; also spiders; snails; sowbugs. Seeds and waste grain make up about one-third of annual diet; and are eaten especially in fall and winter. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory. One male may have more than one mate. In courtship; male faces female; puffs out chest feathers and points bill straight up to show off black "V;" spreads tail widely; and flicks wings. Nest: Placed on the ground; in areas with dense cover of grass; in a small hollow or depression in ground. Nest (built by female) is a domed structure with the entrance on the side; made of grass stems interwoven with the surrounding growth. Usually has narrow trails or "runways" leading to nest through the grass. 
Western-Reef-Heron,Egretta gularis,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Western-Sandpiper,Calidris mauri,Sandpipers,Shores; beaches; mudflats; in summer; dry tundra. Migrants and wintering birds are typically on open shorelines; mudflats; sandy beaches; tidal estuaries. In winter mostly along coast; few remaining inland then. Breeds on tundra slopes; choosing dry sites with low shrub layer and with marshes nearby for feeding.,Forages by walking in shallow water or on mud and probing in mud with bill; also feeds by searching visually and picking up items from surface of shore.,4; sometimes 3; perhaps rarely 5. Whitish to brown; with darker brown spots. Incubation is by both parents; about 21 days. At first; female incubates from late afternoon to mid-morning; male only during mid-day; but male's proportion increases later. Female sometimes departs before eggs hatch. Young: Downy young leave nest a few hours after hatching. Sometimes both parents care for the chicks; but often the female deserts them after a few days; leaving the male to care for the young. Young feed themselves. Age at first flight about 17-21 days.,Includes insects; crustaceans; mollusks; marine worms. On breeding grounds; eats mostly flies and beetles; also other insects; spiders; small crustaceans. Diet in migration and winter varies. On coast eats many amphipods and other crustaceans; small mollusks; marine worms; insects. Inland migrants eat mostly insects; some seeds. ,Male sings while performing display flight over breeding territory. On ground; unmated male approaches female in hunched posture; tail raised over back; repeatedly gives trilled call. Nest site is on ground; usually under low shrub or grass clump. Nest is shallow depression with sparse lining of sedges; leaves; lichens. Male makes several nest scrapes; female chooses one. 
Western-Screech-Owl,Megascops kennicottii,Superb Owls,Wooded canyons; desert mesquites; farm groves; shade trees. Found in a wide variety of wooded or semi-open habitats; including forest edge; wooded suburbs; canyons; mesquite groves and saguaros in the desert; streamside groves in arid country. Mostly in deciduous or mixed woods. Avoids extreme desert situations and higher elevations in mountains.,Forages at dusk and at night. Hunts mostly by watching from a perch and then swooping down to take prey from the ground or from foliage. Also catches flying insects in the air. Can locate prey by sound as well as by sight.,2-5; sometimes 6. White. Incubation is mostly or entirely by female; averages about 26 days. Male brings food to female during incubation. Young: Both parents bring food for young. If intruders (including humans) come too close to nest; adults may attack or may put on distraction display. Young leave nest about 4 weeks after hatching; are cared for by parents for some time thereafter.,Mostly small mammals and large insects. Diet varies with habitat and region. Includes many beetles; moths; other insects; as well as spiders; scorpions; centipedes; also many small mammals; such as mice; voles; pocket gophers. Also eats small birds; lizards; snakes; frogs; fish.  ,Courtship displays of male while perched include bowing; clicking bill. Male brings food to female. Mated pairs preen each other's feathers; call in duet. Nest site is in cavity in tree; pole; or giant cactus; typically in old woodpecker hole but also in natural hollows in trees. May also use old magpie nests. Sites usually 5-35' above ground. 
Western-Spindalis,Spindalis zena,Spindalises,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Western-Tanager,Piranga ludoviciana,Cardinals; Grosbeaks and Buntings,Open conifer or mixed forests; widespread in migration. Breeds mostly in the high mountains or the North; in forest of spruce; fir; pine; aspen; rarely in lower elevation woods mostly of oak. In migration may occur in any habitat; even desert. Winters in the tropics mostly in pine-oak woods or forest edge. In California; may winter in eucalyptus groves.,Forages mostly in tops of trees. Usually feeds deliberately; peering about slowly for insects in foliage. Also flies out to catch insects in mid-air. Regularly visits flowers; probably to feed both on nectar and on insects found there.,3-5. Pale blue or bluish green; with brown blotches sometimes concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; about 13 days. Young: Both parents bring food for the nestlings. Young probably leave the nest about 2 weeks after hatching.,Mostly insects; some fruit and berries. Feeds mainly on insects; including wasps; bees; ants; beetles; grasshoppers; termites; cicadas. Also feeds on many berries; such as mulberries and elderberries; and takes some cultivated fruit. ,Male sings during late spring and summer to defend nesting territory. Early stages of courtship may involve male chasing female among the trees. Nest site is usually in coniferous tree such as fir or pine; sometimes in aspen; oak; or other deciduous tree. Usually placed at a fork in a horizontal branch well out from the trunk; and 15-65' above the ground; rarely lower. Nest (probably built mostly by female) is a shallow open cup made of twigs; grass; rootlets; lined with animal hair and fine rootlets. 
Western-Wood-Pewee,Contopus sordidulus,Tyrant Flycatchers,Woodlands; pine-oak forests; open conifers; river groves. Breeds in a wide variety of open wooded habitats; mostly from the lowlands up to middle elevations in mountains. Favored habitats include aspen groves; pine-oak woods; and cottonwood-willow groves along streams. Winters at forest edges and in scrubby woods in the tropics.,Does most foraging by watching from an exposed perch within the shady middle or lower levels of a tree; then flying out to catch an insect in the air. Also flies out and hovers while taking insects from foliage or twigs; sometimes from tall grass.,3; sometimes 2; rarely 4. Whitish; with brown and lavender blotches often concentrated toward larger end. Incubation is by female; 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Age of young at first flight probably about 14-18 days.,Insects. Feeds almost entirely on insects; mostly flying ones; only occasionally eating a few berries. Diet features various kinds of flies; also wasps; bees; winged ants; moths; beetles; and others; including a few caterpillars. ,Male sings in spring; especially at dawn and dusk; to defend nesting territory. Courtship behavior is not well known; may involve active chasing through treetops. Nest site is in tree (perhaps more often deciduous than coniferous); usually on a horizontal branch well out from the trunk. Usually 15-40' above ground; can be lower or much higher. Nest (probably built by female) is flat open cup of grass; plant fibers; plant down; the outside decorated with gray mosses; leaves; and sometimes lichens. From the side or below; nest may look like a bump or knot on the branch. Some observers report that nest of Western is typically larger than that of Eastern Wood-Pewee. 
Whimbrel,Numenius phaeopus,Sandpipers,Shores; mudflats; marshes; tundra. Found on a wide variety of habitats on migration. Most common on mudflats; but also found on rocky shores; sandy beaches; salt marshes; flooded agricultural fields; grassy fields near coast. In summer; breeds on Arctic tundra.,Forages by walking on open flats; picking up items from surface or probing just below surface; despite long bill; does not seem to probe deeply. When feeding on crabs; may break off legs and crush shell before swallowing body of crab.,4; sometimes 3. Olive to buff; blotched with shades of brown. Incubation is by both sexes; roughly 24-28 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young; but young feed themselves. Adults actively attack predators flying over nesting area; and will fly straight at human intruders; swerving aside at last moment. Age of young at first flight about 5-6 weeks.,Includes insects; crustaceans; berries. On breeding grounds may feed mostly on insects at first; but berries (such as crowberry and cranberry) become major part of diet by late summer. On coast; often eats many crabs; also amphipods and other crustaceans; marine worms; small mollusks. ,Early in breeding season; male performs flight display over nesting territory: flies in large circles; alternately fluttering higher and gliding down; while giving whistling and bubbling song. On ground; members of pair may call together. Nest site is on ground; usually in dry raised area near low-lying wet tundra. Nest (probably built mostly by female) is shallow depression; lined with bits of lichen; moss; grass. 
Whiskered-Auklet,Aethia pygmaea,Auks; Murres; Puffins,Ocean; tide-rips; rocky coasts. Usually at sea within a few miles of islands; in relatively shallow water. Favors rough water where currents converge; or where tidal currents race across shallows or through narrow passes between islands. Nests on islands among rocks or cliffs.,Forages while swimming underwater. Depth of dives unknown; but usually feeds in fairly shallow water.,one. Dull white. Incubation is by both sexes; roughly 35-36 days. Young: both parents feed young; visiting nests at night; bringing food back in throat pouch. Age of young bird at departure from nest not well known; may be about 40 days. Fledgling departs by flying away from nest site at night.,Small crustaceans. Diet not well known; primarily small crustaceans including copepods; euphausiid shrimp; amphipods; also marine worms; mollusks. May concentrate on copepods in summer; euphausiids in winter. ,Breeds in colonies; not as densely packed as in related small auks. Active at colonies mostly at night; especially when not nesting in association with other species. Courtship behavior not well known; includes pairs calling in duet. Nest sites in small openings in talus slopes; boulder piles; or crevices in cliffs; sometimes in areas of soil mixed with rock. No nest built; egg laid on bare rock or soil. 
Whiskered-Screech-Owl,Megascops trichopsis,Superb Owls,Canyons; pine-oak woods; oaks; sycamores. Favors habitat with relatively dense; broad-leaved oaks; both in pure stands and in mixed woodland with pines; generally above 5000'. In Arizona canyons; often common in groves of sycamores next to oak woodland.,Hunts at dusk and through the night. Hunts by watching from a perch and then making short flights out to take prey from foliage or from the ground; may fly back and forth or hover among vegetation to take insects. Captures most prey with feet.,3; sometimes 4. White. Incubation is probably mostly by female; incubation period not well known. Young: Both parents probably bring food for young. Development of young and age at first flight not well known. Parents may feed young for some time after they leave nest.,Mostly large insects. Eats many caterpillars; beetles; moths; crickets; katydids; and other insects; also other arthropods; including centipedes and scorpions. Sometimes eats small rodents. ,Breeding behavior is not well known. Males defend breeding territory by singing at night; and may vigorously attack intruding males. Members of mated pairs call in duet; also nibble at each other's bills and preen each other's feathers. Nest site is in cavity in tree such as oak or sycamore; either an abandoned woodpecker hole or a natural hollow; nest sites often 10-30' above ground. 
White-Ibis,Eudocimus albus,Ibises and Spoonbills,Salt; brackish; and fresh marshes; rice fields; mangroves. May forage in any kind of shallow water; commonly flying to feed in fresh water even in coastal regions. Foraging sites include marshes; mudflats; flooded pastures; lake edges; mangrove lagoons; grassy fields. Nests in mangroves; swamps; dense thickets; or marshes.,Forages by walking slowly in shallow water; sweeping bill from side to side and probing at bottom. Also forages on land; especially on mud or in short grass. Finds food by touch while probing; by sight at other times; seizing items from surface. White Ibises may steal food from each other and; in turn; have food stolen from them by larger species.,2-3; up to 5. Pale blue-green to white; blotched with brown. Incubation is by both sexes; averages 21 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Young may clamber about near nest after 3 weeks; can make short flights after 4-5 weeks; capable of sustained flight at 6 weeks; may leave colony to forage with adults after 7 weeks.,Varied; includes many crustaceans. Diet is quite variable; but crayfish and crabs are major items. Also eats insects; snails; frogs; marine worms; snakes; small fish. ,First breeds at age of 2 years. Breeds in colonies; sometimes mixed with other wading birds. Displays of male include ritualized preening; leaning over and grasping twig in bill; pointing bill skyward and lowering head onto back. Nest sites in mangroves; trees; thickets; usually 2-15' above ground or water; sometimes higher or on ground. Nest built by both sexes; male bringing most material; female doing most of building. Material often stolen from nests of other pairs. Nest is usually platform of sticks; sometimes of cordgrass or reeds. 
White-Wagtail,Motacilla alba,Wagtails and Pipits,Rocky places; towns; rivers. In Alaska; very localized in summer. Seldom on open tundra; usually around low sea cliffs; coastal villages; or shacks on beaches; sometimes on gravel flats of rivers well inland. In the Old World; found in almost any kind of open or semi-open terrain.,Feeds on ground or along edge of water. Forages by walking and picking up items; by making quick dashes to grab active insects; or by flying up to catch insects in the air. Sometimes walks on floating vegetation or in shallow water.,5-7; sometimes 3-8. Whitish to gray; finely spotted with gray or brown. Incubation is by both parents (female does more); about 12-13 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest about 11-16 days after hatching; are tended by parents for up to another week.,Insects. Diet in Alaska not known in detail. In Old World; eats mostly insects; including midges; crane flies; and other flies; beetles; mayflies; dragonfly larvae; caterpillars; moths; and many others. Feeds on a variety of aquatic insect larvae as well as adult insects. Also eats some spiders; earthworms; tiny fish; and seeds. ,In courtship; male pursues female. On ground; male points bill up to show off throat pattern; runs in zigzags near female; postures with deep bowing; tail lowered and spread widely; may raise one wing over back. Nest: Natural sites are in crevices among rocks or cliffs; many in Alaska nest in artificial sites; such as abandoned gold dredges; buildings; or empty oil drums; or under debris. Usually nests low. Nest (usually built by both sexes; but female may do more) is open cup of twigs; grass; rootlets; moss; lined with hair and feathers. 
White-breasted-Nuthatch,Sitta carolinensis,Nuthatches,Forests; woodlots; groves; shade trees. Typically in mature deciduous forest; also in mixed forest with some conifers; rarely found in pure coniferous forest. Often favors woodland edge; along rivers; roads; clearings; may be in suburbs or parks as long as large trees are present.,Forages mainly on trunk and larger limbs of trees; climbing about and exploring all surfaces. Sometimes feeds on ground. During fall and winter; regularly caches food items in bark crevices on territory.,5-9; rarely 10. White; spotted with reddish-brown. Female incubates; is fed on nest by male. Incubation period 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed young. Age when young leave nest uncertain; or perhaps quite variable; reported as 14-26 days. 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects; also seeds. Eats mostly insects (and spiders) during summer; supplementing these with seeds in winter. Proportion of seeds in diet may vary from zero in summer to more than 60% in winter. Will also feed on suet and peanut-butter mixtures at feeders. Young are fed entirely on insects and spiders. ,Pairs remain together on nesting territory all year; may mate for life. Courtship behavior begins by late winter. In courtship display; male raises head; spreads tail; droops wings; sways back and forth; and bows deeply. Male also performs much courtship feeding of female. Nest site is large natural cavity or old woodpecker hole; usually 15-60' above ground; may rarely use birdhouses; may sometimes excavate own nest cavity. Female builds nest in cavity; a simple cup of bark fibers; grasses; twigs; hair. Adults may spend minutes at a time sweeping the outside and inside of nest with a crushed insect held in bill; chemical secretions of insects may help repel predators. Also sometimes adds mud to rim of nest entrance. 
White-cheeked-Pintail,Anas bahamensis,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
White-collared-Swift,Streptoprocne zonaris,Swifts,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
White-crowned-Pigeon,Patagioenas leucocephala,Pigeons and Doves,Mangrove keys; wooded islands. Moves about freely among wooded habitats in south Florida. Usually nests in mangroves on small offshore islands; sometimes in outer fringe of mangroves along mainland; but generally avoids areas having raccoons (apparently a major nest predator). Feeds in tropical hardwood groves on islands and mainland.,Forages almost entirely in trees; clambering about with an agility surprising for size of bird; leaning and stretching and sometimes hanging upside down momentarily to reach berries. Seldom comes to the ground to feed.,2; sometimes 1. White. Incubation is by both parents; mostly by female at night and male by day; incubation period not well known. Young: Both parents feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest at about 3 weeks. In parts of range; may raise 3 broods per year.,Mostly fruits and berries. Feeds on the fruits and berries of a great variety of native trees and shrubs of the Caribbean region; also sometimes those of introduced plants. May eat seeds at times; and perhaps rarely insects or snails. ,In Florida; breeds most commonly during July and August. Often nests in colonies. Male calls to attract female while perching erect; chest puffed out. In courtship; male struts and nods. Nest site is usually on fork in horizontal branch; low (below 15') in mangroves or other shrubs; sometimes on cactus; may be up to 30' above ground or water; or on ground on small islands. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is loosely-constructed platform of twigs; lined with grasses or other fine material. 
White-crowned-Sparrow,Zonotrichia leucophrys,New World Sparrows,Boreal scrub; forest edges; thickets; chaparral; gardens; parks; in winter; also farms and desert washes. Breeding habitat varies; but always in brushy places; such as dwarf willow thickets at edge of tundra; bushy clearings in northern forest; scrub just below timberline in mountains; chaparral and well-wooded suburbs along Pacific Coast. In winter; also found in hedgerows; overgrown fields; desert washes.,Forages mainly while hopping and running on ground. Sometimes feeds up in low shrubs; and occasionally will make short flights to catch insects in mid-air. Except during nesting season; usually forages in flocks.,4-5; sometimes 3; rarely 2-6. Creamy white to pale greenish; heavily spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; 11-14 days; usually 12. Young: Both parents feed nestlings; although female may do more at first. Young leave the nest about 7-12 days after hatching; with those in far north tending to leave earlier than those farther south. Male may care for fledglings while female begins 2nd nesting attempt. 1 brood per year in far North; 2-3 (or even 4) farther south.,Mostly seeds; other vegetable matter; and insects. Apparently feeds mostly on seeds in winter; mainly those of weeds and grasses. Feeds on other vegetable matter at various seasons; including buds; flowers; moss capsules; willow catkins; berries; and small fruits. Also eats many insects and spiders; especially in summer. Young are fed mostly insects. ,In southernmost coastal populations; pairs may remain together all year on permanent territories. Elsewhere; males arrive on nesting grounds before females; defend territories by singing. Nest: In North; site is usually on ground at base of shrub or grass clump; often placed in shallow depression in ground; along West Coast; nest often placed a few feet up in shrubs. Nest (built by female) is open cup made of grass; twigs; weeds; rootlets; strips of bark; lined with fine grass; feathers; animal hair. 
White-eared-Hummingbird,Hylocharis leucotis,Hummingbirds,Montane forest; pine-oak woods. In Mexico and Central America found mostly in clearing and edges of coniferous forest in higher mountains; as well as pine-oak woods at middle elevations. In the U.S.; has been seen most often coming to feeders in mountain canyons; in areas dominated by oak; pine; or Douglas-fir.,At flowers; usually feeds while hovering; extending its bill and long tongue deep into the center of the flower. At feeders; may either hover or perch. To catch small insects; it may fly out and grab them in midair; or hover to pluck them from foliage; sometimes takes insects from spider webs.,2. White. Incubation is by female only; 14-16 days. Young: Female feeds the young; sticking her bill deep into their mouths and regurgitating tiny insects; perhaps mixed with nectar. Age of young at first flight about 23-26 days.,Mostly nectar and insects. Takes nectar from flowers; and will feed on tiny insects as well. Will also feed on sugar-water mixtures in hummingbird feeders. ,Has been known to nest only a few times in the United States. Where the species is common; males gather in loose groups (scattered about 60-100 feet apart) and perch in trees; singing short songs to attract females. When female visits; male follows her back to her nesting territory and performs flight display. Nest site is 5-20 feet above ground in shrub or tree; saddled on twig or placed in fork. Nest (built by female) is a compact cup of grasses; moss; pine needles; spider webs; lined with plant down. The outside is camouflaged lichen and moss. 
White-eyed-Vireo,Vireo griseus,Vireos,Wood edges; brush; brambles; undergrowth. Breeds in various kinds of dense low growth; including briar tangles on low swampy ground; shrubby thickets of maple; wild plum; willow; and other saplings in overgrown pastures; and scrub in open woods or near forest edges. Winters in a wide array of similar habitats.,Forages by moving actively among twigs and branches in dense low cover; searching for insects among the foliage. Often hovers momentarily to take insects from leaves.,4; sometimes 3-5. White with specks of brown or black. Incubation is by both parents; 13-15 days. Nests are commonly parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 9-11 days after hatching. 1 brood per year in the north; 2 in the south.,Insects and berries. In the breeding season; takes almost entirely insects; and nearly one-third of diet then may be caterpillars; moths; and butterflies. Diet also includes true bugs; scale insects; many kinds of beetles; ants; wasps; bees; grasshoppers; also spiders; snails; and occasionally small lizards. In migration and in winter; also eats berries and small fruits. ,Male sings incessantly from early spring to late summer to defend nesting territory. In courtship; male displays to female by fluffing plumage; spreading tail; and uttering a whining call. Nest: Placed low (within 25' of ground; usually much lower) in shrub or sapling. Nest is supported by the rim woven onto a horizontal forked twig. Both parents help build nest; a deep; hanging cup made of twigs; roots; shreds of bark; grass stems; leaves; plant down; lichen; moss; sometimes fragments of wasp nests. Nest is bound with spiderwebs; lined with fine grass and fibers. 
White-faced-Ibis,Plegadis chihi,Ibises and Spoonbills,Fresh marshes; irrigated land; tules. For foraging; favors very shallow water; as in marshes; flooded pastures; irrigated fields. Sometimes in damp meadows with no standing water. Prefers fresh water marsh; but sometimes forages in salt marsh.,Forages mostly by wading in shallow water; probing in soft mud for food. Also picks insects and other items from surface of water or soil; or from plants above water.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Clutches of more than 5 probably result from other females laying eggs in nest. Eggs pale blue-green to dark turquoise. Incubation is by both sexes; 17-26 days; usually 21-22 days. Young: Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. At age of 3 weeks; young may move about outside nest; attempt to fly at 4 weeks; can usually fly fairly well at 5 weeks.,Mostly insects; crustaceans; earthworms. Feeds on aquatic insects and their larvae; as well as those living in damp soil. Eats many crayfish and earthworms. Also eats frogs; snails; small fish; leeches; spiders. ,Breeds in colonies. Colony sites often shift from year to year with changes in water levels. Nest site is usually in dense marsh growth (such as bulrush or cattails) or in low shrubs or trees above water; sometimes on ground on islands. Nest (built by both sexes) is bulky platform of bulrushes or other plant stems; with depression at center. Material gathered close to nest site; sometimes stolen from vacant nests of other birds. 
White-faced-Storm-Petrel,Pelagodroma marina,Southern Storm-Petrels,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
White-headed-Woodpecker,Dryobates albolarvatus,Woodpeckers,Mountain pine forests. Seldom found away from pines; and favors those with large cones or prolific seed production; such as Coulter; ponderosa; Jeffrey; and sugar pines. Also forages in incense-cedars; sequoias; and other conifers; and ranges very uncommonly up to elevations dominated by firs.,Obtains pine seeds by prying open cones in trees. Also forages for insects on trunk and limbs; and among needle clusters in conifers. Typically pries off flakes of bark rather than knocking them off; so foraging tends to be quiet. Sometimes catches insects in flight. Males and females often have different foraging behaviors; but this varies with place and season.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. White; often becoming stained by pine pitch on parents' plumage. Incubation is by both sexes; about 14 days. Young: Both parents feed young; and young leave the nest about 26 days after hatching.,Mostly insects and pine seeds. At some seasons; eats mostly pine seeds. Diet also includes wood-boring beetles; ants; and other insects; as well as spiders. ,Both sexes tap at potential nest site; and other displays around nest are apparently important in pair formation. Nest site is in cavity in heavy dead stub of tree (especially pines; also aspens; oaks; and others); usually 6-15' above ground; sometimes 2-25'; rarely up to 50'. New cavity each year; but often in same tree as used in previous years. Nest hole is excavated by both sexes. 
White-rumped-Sandpiper,Calidris fuscicollis,Sandpipers,Prairies; shores; mudflats; in summer; tundra. During migration; found in a variety of situations; including flooded fields; shallow ponds; edges of freshwater marshes; tidal flats; gravel beaches. Breeds mostly on low-lying wet tundra with grassy areas and dwarf willows; sometimes on higher and drier tundra.,On mudflats; forages by probing in mud or in shallow water; also picks up some items from surface. On tundra; often probes deeply in moss and other vegetation.,4; rarely 3. Olive to green; sometimes buff; blotched with brown; olive-brown; or gray. Incubation is by female only; about 22 days. Young: Downy young leave nest less than a day after hatching. Female tends young and broods them to keep them warm; but young apparently find all their own food. Age at first flight about 16-17 days; become independent soon thereafter.,Includes insects; mollusks; marine worms; seeds. Diet not well known. On breeding grounds; probably eats mostly insects; including crane flies; beetles. During migration and winter; eats insects; marine worms; snails and other mollusks; crustaceans; leeches. Also eats many seeds and other plant material at various times of year. ,Male displays over breeding territory by gliding and fluttering; making rattling and oinking sounds. On ground; male stretches wings out to side; raises tail high to show off white rump patch; and walks and runs while giving repeated call. Nest site is on ground; usually well hidden in clump of grass or moss on tundra. Nest (built by female) is a cup-shaped depression; lining material; bits of lichen; moss; and leaves; may be present naturally; not added by female. 
White-tailed-Hawk,Geranoaetus albicaudatus,Hawks and Eagles,Dry grassland; coastal prairies. In Texas; found mostly on open grassland with scattered shrubs or low trees; such as mesquite; hackberry; and oak. Mostly on coastal prairie; also inland in ranch country. Generally not found where land is farmed or heavily grazed.,Hunts by watching for prey either from a perch or while flying; dives steeply when prey is spotted. Sometimes catches flying insects in the air. Is attracted to grass fires; where it will catch creatures trying to escape the flames.,2; sometimes 3; rarely 1 or 4. White; sometimes lightly spotted with brown. Incubation is mostly by female; 29-32 days. Young: Apparently both parents bring food to young in nest; but roles of sexes in feeding young not well known. Young are able to fly at about 46-55 days after hatching; may remain with parents and be fed by them for up to 7 months or even longer.,Quite varied. Known to eat rats; mice; pocket gophers; rabbits; birds; snakes; lizards; frogs; crayfish; crabs; insects. Sometimes feeds on carrion. ,Breeding behavior not thoroughly studied. In one courtship display; both birds land on ground; male goes through act of pulling at grass blades and weeds. Nest site in Texas is usually on top of low tree or shrub; averaging about 10' above ground; sometimes as low as 3'; sometimes higher; rarely up to 40'. Nest (apparently built by both sexes) is a bulky platform of sticks; twigs; grasses; weeds. Nest may be used more than once. 
White-tailed-Kite,Elanus leucurus,Hawks and Eagles,Open groves; river valleys; marshes; grasslands. Found in a wide variety of open habitats in North America; including open oak grassland; desert grassland; farm country; marshes. Main requirements seem to be trees for perching and nesting; and open ground with high populations of rodents.,Hunts mostly by flying over open country; pausing frequently to hover and study the ground; on sighting prey; it dives; catching prey in its talons.,Usually 4; sometimes 5; rarely 3-6. May tend to lay larger clutches in years when rodents are abundant. Eggs creamy white; blotched with shades of warm brown. Incubation is by female; 26-32 days. Male usually perches nearby; and brings food to female during incubation. Young: Female broods young while they are small; male brings food; and female feeds it to nestlings. Later; prey is dropped into nest; and young feed on it themselves. Young are able to fly at about 30-35 days; but may return to nest to sleep or to be fed for some time after. Adults may nest a 2nd time in same season; and if so; young from first nesting may be driven from territory.,Mostly small rodents. Specializes on small rodents that are active by day in open country; particularly voles and house mice. Other items in diet; mostly of minor importance; include pocket gophers; harvest mice; rats; shrews; young rabbits; sometimes birds. Rarely may eat snakes; lizards; frogs; large insects. ,In courtship; male flies near female in odd hovering with wings in sharp "V;" calling; male feeds female. Nest site is in top of tree; usually 20-50' above ground; sometimes higher or lower depending on available sites. Live-oak often chosen as nest site. Nest (built by both sexes) is a good-sized platform of sticks and twigs; lined with grasses; weeds; Spanish moss. 
White-tailed-Ptarmigan,Lagopus leucura,Pheasants and Grouse,Rocky alpine tundra; mountains above timberline. Summers above timberline; on rocky slopes with low vegetation (a few inches tall); or damp alpine meadows near streams or snowfields. Sometimes in stunted growth just below timberline. Elevations from under 4;000' in Alaska to almost 14;000' in Colorado. In winter often moves slightly lower; to areas where willows and other plants extend above snow.,Forages while walking; nipping off pieces of plants with bill. Feeds in flocks at most times of year (from late summer through winter).,2-8; usually about 5. Pale cinnamon; spotted with dark brown. Incubation is by female only; 22-26 days. Young: Downy chicks leave nest a few hours after hatching. Female tends young and leads them to food; but young feed themselves. If danger threatens brood; female puts on distraction display; running in zigzags with wings dragging. Young can fly at 10-12 days; reach full size at 12-14 weeks. Brood gradually breaks up in fall; young birds joining winter flocks.,Mostly buds; leaves; twigs; and seeds. Adults are almost entirely vegetarian; feeding on all parts of low alpine plants; especially buds; twigs; and leaves of willows. Also favors birch; alder; sedges; crowberry; and others. Very young chicks eat mostly insects at first; soon switching to more plants. Regularly swallows grit to help with digesting rough plant material. ,For breeding season; males and females defend individual territories. In courtship display; male raises red combs above eyes; spreads tail; struts and bows. Male usually remains with female until sometime during incubation. Nest site is on ground; usually in rocky area; matted willow thicket; or sedge meadow. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression lined with plant material; with a few feathers added. 
White-tailed-Tropicbird,Phaethon lepturus,Tropicbirds,Tropical ocean; islands. Found close to shore around nesting islands but otherwise spends most of its time far out at sea; over warm waters. Nests on islands; often those with rocky cliffs.,Forages by plunging into water from flight; submerging briefly; sometimes by swooping down to surface without striking water; perhaps taking flying fish in the air. May feed most actively in early morning and late afternoon.,One. Whitish to pale buff; with brownish and purplish spots. Incubation is by both sexes; 40-42 days; perhaps sometimes shorter. Young:  Both parents feed young; by regurgitation. Age at first flight usually 70-85 days.,Mostly fish. Feeds on a wide variety of small fish; but seems to favor flying fish; which are common in tropical waters. Also eats small squid; snails; crabs. ,May nest as isolated pairs or in colonies; depending on spacing of available nest sites. Nesting season is spring and summer in Bermuda; may nest year-round at some tropical islands. Courtship displays include two birds flying gracefully in unison; one above the other; with higher bird bending tail down to touch tail of lower bird. Nest:  Site is in crevice or hole in rock; on ledge; on ground under dense vegetation; in Old World tropics; may nest in hollow tree or log. Same site may be re-used for several years. No nest built; egg laid on bare ground. 
White-throated-Sparrow,Zonotrichia albicollis,New World Sparrows,Thickets; brush; undergrowth of conifer and mixed woodlands. Breeds in zone of coniferous and mixed forest; mainly in openings having dense thickets of deciduous shrubs; such as around ponds; clearings; edges; roadsides; second growth. Winters in areas with dense low cover; including forest undergrowth and edges; well-vegetated suburbs and parks.,Forages mostly on ground under or close to dense thickets. Often scratches briefly in leaf-litter with both feet. Also forages up in shrubs and low trees; mainly in summer.,4-5; sometimes 3-6; rarely 2-7. Pale blue or greenish blue; marked with reddish brown and lavender. Incubation is by female only; about 11-14 days. ,Mostly seeds and insects. Feeds heavily on insects during breeding season; including damselflies; ants; wasps; true bugs; beetles; flies; caterpillars; and others; plus spiders; millipedes; and snails. Winter diet is mostly seeds of weeds and grasses. Also eats many berries; especially in fall. Young are fed mostly insects. ,The two color morphs (with tan-striped and white-striped heads) may be either male or female; adults almost always mate with the opposite color morph. Male sings to defend nesting territory. Nest site usually on ground; well hidden by low shrubs (such as blueberry); grass; or ferns. Sometimes nests above ground in shrubs; brushpiles; or low trees; rarely up to 10' high. Nest (built by female) is open cup made of grass; twigs; weeds; pine needles; lined with fine grass; rootlets; animal hair. 
White-throated-Swift,Aeronautes saxatalis,Swifts,Open sky; cruising widely. May be seen in the air over virtually any western habitat; wherever there might be flying insects. Breeds in crevices in cliffs; mostly in dry mountains and canyons; locally on sea cliffs.,Forages only in flight. May forage high or low; depending on weather conditions. Typically seen foraging in flocks.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White; often becoming stained or spotted in the nest. Incubation is probably by both parents; about 20-27 days. Young: Apparently fed by both parents. Young are probably able to climb about inside nesting crevice before they are old enough to fly. Age at first flight may be about six weeks.,Flying insects. Feeds on a wide variety of flying insects; including flies; beetles; true bugs; wasps; and others. May feed heavily on winged adult ants during an emergence of these insects. ,Many details of nesting remain poorly known; partly because the nest sites are so inaccessible. Courtship involves aerial displays; birds also mate while in flight; sometimes joining and then tumbling down for hundreds of feet. Nest site is usually in narrow vertical crevice in high cliff. Sometimes nests in crevices in buildings. Same site may be used for many years. Nest is shaped like shallow half saucer; made of feathers; weeds; grasses; glued together and to wall of crevice with the birds' saliva. 
White-throated-Thrush,Turdus assimilis,Thrushes,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
White-tipped-Dove,Leptotila verreauxi,Pigeons and Doves,Shady woodlands; river thickets. In southern Texas; found in any kind of dense low growth; most common in native woodland; but also found in second growth. Within its wide range (from Texas to Argentina) found in many habitats; but mostly drier or more open woods; avoiding unbroken rain forest.,Forages mostly on ground; walking about in woodland undergrowth; may sometimes forage in low trees or shrubs. In some parks in southern Texas; will come birdseed or other food put out for them. Several may concentrate at sources of food; but usually solitary; not sociable like many doves.,2. Pale buff; fading to white. Incubation is probably by both parents; about 14 days. Young: Both parents presumed to feed young "pigeon milk." Development of young and age at first flight not well known.,Probably seeds and berries. Diet not well known. Evidently eats many seeds; including those of grasses; mesquites; and elms; also berries and fruits; including those of hackberry and prickly pear cactus. May eat some insects. ,In courtship on ground; male may hunch shoulders; lower head; run a few steps toward female; then stop and coo. Also may have bowing display. Nest site is in dense low tree; thorny shrub; or tangle of vines; usually less than 15' above the ground; perhaps sometimes on the ground. Usually placed on horizontal fork of branch. Nest (probably built by both sexes) is a platform of sticks and weed stems; usually quite flimsy. 
White-winged-Crossbill,Loxia leucoptera,Finches,Spruce forests; tamaracks. Seldom found away from conifer forests. Breeds mainly in forests having high concentrations of spruce trees; also where tamaracks are common. When not nesting; may also occur in forest of pine; fir; hemlock; juniper; and occasionally in deciduous trees. Isolated race in Hispaniola; West Indies; lives in pine forest.,Forages mostly by clambering about in conifers to reach the cones. Usually forages in flocks.,2-4; rarely 5. Whitish to pale blue-green; with brown and lavender spots concentrated at larger end. Incubation is by female; probably 12-14 days. Male feeds female during incubation. Young: Female spends much time brooding young at first; while male brings food; later; both parents feed nestlings. Age at which young leave the nest is not well known. Male may care for fledglings while female begins another nesting attempt.,Mostly conifer seeds. Feeds mainly on spruce seeds whenever these are available; also favors seeds of tamarack and hemlock; and will eat seeds of many other conifers. Also feeds on buds; weed seeds; berries; insects. Will eat salt. Young are fed mostly regurgitated seeds. ,May nest whenever and wherever good cone crops are present in spruce forest; which may be at any time of year; including mid-winter. Usually nests in loose colonies. In courtship; males may chase females in flight; members of pair may perch close together; touching bills; and male may feed female. Nest: Placed on horizontal limb of tree; usually spruce or other conifer; often 10-15' above ground; can be lower or much higher (up to 70'). Nest (built by female; with male occasionally bringing material) is open cup of twigs; weeds; grass; bark strips; lined with rootlets; lichens; moss; plant fibers; hair. 
White-winged-Dove,Zenaida asiatica,Pigeons and Doves,River woods; mesquites; saguaros; groves; towns. Found in a variety of semi-open habitats in southwest; including native brushlands in Texas and deserts farther west; plus chaparral and open oak woods; also adapts quickly to altered habitats; such as farmland; suburbs; citrus groves; plantings of trees in grassland. In winter; those remaining north of Mexico are mostly in towns.,Forages mostly on ground; also up in trees; shrubs; cactus. Often seen at top of giant saguaro cactus; feeding on fruit or flowers (may get much of its water that way in desert areas).,2; sometimes 1-4. White to very pale buff. Incubation is by both parents; 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest at about 13-16 days; are fed by parents for some time thereafter. 2-3 broods per year.,Mostly seeds; some fruits and berries. Feeds on seeds of many wild plants; also some cultivated grains; may eat acorns where available. Feeds on fruits; especially those of cactus; also smaller berries. Will come to large flowers; apparently for nectar. ,May nest in colonies; especially where nest sites in isolated grove are surrounded by good feeding areas. In courtship display; male flaps up and then glides down in wide circle. While perched; male raises tail and quickly fans it open and shut to flash black and white tail pattern. Both members of pair go through ritualized nodding and preening motions. Nest site is in shrub; tree; or cactus; usually 4-30' above ground. Placed on horizontal limb or fork in branch; sometimes on top of old nest or on tangle of thorns. Nest is a flimsy platform of sticks. Male brings most material; female builds. 
White-winged-Parakeet,Brotogeris versicolurus,African and New World Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
White-winged-Scoter,Melanitta deglandi,Ducks and Geese,Salt bays; ocean; in summer; lakes. In breeding season around lakes; ponds; and slow-moving rivers; generally in open country. In winter mainly on coastal waters; especially shallow water over shellfish beds; some remain on Great Lakes and other large bodies of fresh water.,Forages by diving and swimming underwater; propelled mainly by feet; with wings partly spread to aid in maneuvering and thrust. Small items are swallowed underwater; but large mollusks are brought to surface and swallowed whole there.,Usually 9-10; sometimes 6-12. Pale buff or pinkish. Incubation is by female only; 25-30 days. Female covers eggs with down when leaving nest. Young: Leave nest shortly after hatching. Female tends young and broods them while small; but young feed themselves. Age at first flight not well known; may be 9-11 weeks or as little as 7-8 weeks.,Mostly mollusks. In addition to mollusks; also feeds on crustaceans and aquatic insects; plus small numbers of fish. Also eats some plant material; including sea lettuce; pondweeds; and others. ,In courtship; several males may surround one female. Male displays include lowering head; arching back; and rushing forward short distance on water. Several males may pursue female on short underwater chases. Nesting activity begins late; with clutches often not complete until late June or early July. Nest site is on ground; usually close to water in patch of dense brush. On islands in lakes; several nests may be close together. Nest is shallow depression; sometimes with plant material added; lined with down. 
White-winged-Tern,Chlidonias leucopterus,Gulls and Terns,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Whooper-Swan,Cygnus cygnus,Ducks and Geese,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Whooping-Crane,Grus americana,Cranes,Muskeg (summer); prairie pools; marshes. Current breeding habitat is in remote northern forest; in areas of muskeg (swampy coniferous woods with numerous lakes and ponds). Formerly also nested in prairie marshes. Winters in coastal marsh; where adult pairs and families defend territories; returning to same territory each winter.,See family introduction.,2; sometimes 1 or 3. Olive-buff; spotted with dark brown. Incubation is by both sexes; 29-31 days; female usually incubates at night. Young: Downy young leave nest within a few hours after hatching. Both parents feed young. Two eggs typically hatch; but very rarely or never does more than one young bird survive. Young is able to fly at about 3 months after hatching.,Omnivorous. In winter; eats insects; shrimp; crabs; clams; snails; frogs; snakes; small fish; seeds; acorns; roots; berries. Summer diet not well known; probably a similarly wide variety of animal and plant matter. ,In courtship; pairs "dance;" leaping into air repeatedly with flapping wings; bills pointed upward; giving bugling calls; dance has a dignified look. Other displays include bowing; tossing tufts of grass in the air; and loud trumpeting or "whooping" calls. Nest site is on ground; typically on marshy island in lake or pond. Nest (built by both sexes) is a large mound of grass; weeds; mud; with depression at center. 
Wild-Turkey,Meleagris gallopavo,Pheasants and Grouse,Woods; mountain forests; wooded swamps. Habitats vary in different parts of continent; include oak-hickory forest; pine-oak forest; cypress swamps; arid mesquite grassland; pinyon-juniper woodland; chaparral. Usually found near some kind of oak (acorns are a favorite food). Best habitat includes a mixture of woodland and open clearings.,Forages mostly by walking on ground. Often scratches in leaf litter to expose food items. Sometimes climbs in shrubs or trees to eat berries. May forage most actively in early morning and evening.,Usually 10-15; sometimes 4-18; rarely more. White to pale buff; dotted with reddish brown. Sometimes more than one female will lay eggs in one nest. Incubation is by female only; 25-31 days. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Female tends young; and broods them at night for several weeks; young feed themselves. Young can make short flights at age of 1-2 weeks; but not full-grown for several months.,Omnivorous. Diet varies with season but is mostly plant material; including many acorns; leaves; seeds; grains; berries; buds; grass blades; roots; bulbs. Also eats insects; spiders; snails. Sometimes eats frogs; lizards; snakes; salamanders; crabs. ,In spring; male gives gobbling call to attract females. In courtship; males puff out feathers; raise and spread tail; swell up face wattles; droop wings; in this exaggerated posture they strut; rattling the wing feathers and making humming sounds. One male will mate with several females.  Nest site is on ground; often at base of tree; under shrub; or in tall grass. Nest is shallow depression; sparsely lined with grass; leaves. 
Willet,Tringa semipalmata,Sandpipers,Marshes; wet meadows; mudflats; beaches. Eastern race nests in areas of extensive salt marsh along coast; western race nests inland; around fresh marshes in open country; especially native grassland. In migration and winter; both forms occur on mudflats; tidal estuaries; sandy beaches.,Forages by walking on shore; in marsh; or in shallow water; probing with its bill in mud or water; or picking items from the surface.,4; rarely 5. Grayish to olive-buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is by both parents; with male incubating at night and sometimes during mid-day; female at other times. Incubation period 22-29 days. Young: Downy young leave nest within a day after hatching; are led by parents to marshy pond areas. Young find all their own food. Female parent departs after 2-3 weeks; leaving male to care for young. Age of young at first flight not well known; probably about 4 weeks.,Includes insects; crustaceans; marine worms. Diet varies with location. On inland waters; may feed largely on aquatic insects. On coast; eats many crabs; including fiddler crabs. Also feeds on other crustaceans; small mollusks; sometimes small fish; eats some plant material; including grass; fresh shoots; and seeds. ,Often nests in colonies; especially along Atlantic Coast. In breeding season; unpaired males perform flight displays; flying over nesting area with wings fluttering through shallow arc; while giving pill-will-willet calls. Nest site is on ground; usually among dense short grass; sometimes on open ground. Usually well hidden; sometimes conspicuous. Nest is shallow depression with grass bent down to form foundation; lined with finer grasses. 
Williamsons-Sapsucker,Sphyrapicus thyroideus,Woodpeckers,Higher conifer forests; burns. In summer found in mountains in conifer forests including spruce; fir; and lodgepole pine; also in aspen groves near conifers. Winters mostly in pine and pine-oak woodland in mountains. Even those few that wander to lowlands in winter are likely to be found in conifers.,Drills tiny holes in tree bark; usually in neatly spaced rows; and then returns to them periodically to feed on the sap that oozes out. Also eats bits of cambium and other tree tissues; as well as insects that are attracted to the sap. Besides drilling sap wells; also takes insects gleaned elsewhere in trees; sometimes catches insects in the air or on ground; and perches among twigs to eat berries.,4-5; sometimes 3-7. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); 12-14 days. Young: Both parents feed young; carrying food in bill and throat; young are fed mostly ants. Young leave nest 3-4 weeks after hatching; may disperse from territory very soon afterward. Apparently 1 brood per year.,Includes insects; tree sap; fruit. Eats many kinds of insects; ants may form a very high percentage of diet during breeding season. Also feeds heavily on tree sap; and eats some small fruits and berries. ,Courtship displays include exaggerated floating and fluttering flight near nest site; and members of pair facing each other while bobbing and swinging heads. Nest site is cavity in tree; often in aspen; pine; or fir; usually 5-60' above ground. Favors trees with dead heartwood and live outer layer; and may return to dig new nest holes in same tree year after year. Excavation of cavity is by male. 
Willow-Flycatcher,Empidonax traillii,Tyrant Flycatchers,Bushes; willow thickets; brushy fields; upland copses. Breeds in thickets of deciduous trees and shrubs; especially willows; or along woodland edges. Often near streams or marshes (especially in southern part of range); but may be found in drier habitats than Alder Flycatcher. Winters around clearings and second growth in the tropics; especially near water.,Forages by watching from a perch and then flying out to catch insects. Usually forages from perches within tall shrubs or low trees; catches insects in mid-air; or takes them from foliage while hovering.,3-4. Pale buff to whitish; with brown spots concentrated toward larger end. Incubation is by female; 12-15 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 12-14 days.,Mostly insects. Differences in diet; if any; between this species and Alder Flycatcher are not well known. Apparently eats mostly insects; including wasps; bees; winged ants; beetles; flies; caterpillars; moths; true bugs; and others. Also eats some spiders; a few berries; and possibly some seeds. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing (female may sing also). Courtship behavior is not well known; probably involves male actively chasing female through the trees. In some regions; Brown-headed Cowbirds often lay their eggs in nests of this species. Nest site is in a deciduous shrub or tree; especially in willow; 4-15' above the ground. Placed in a vertical or diagonal fork of a branch; or on top of a horizontal branch. Nest (built by female alone) is an open cup of grass; strips of bark; plant fibers; lined with plant down and other soft materials. Nest often has strips of plant material dangling from the bottom. 
Willow-Ptarmigan,Lagopus lagopus,Pheasants and Grouse,Tundra; willow scrub; muskeg. Generally found north of timberline; in lower wet tundra with abundant thickets of dwarf willow. Also in brushy openings within northern forest. In mountainous regions; lives near timberline or in open valleys in shrubby willow growth.,Forages while walking by picking at vegetation; nipping off food with bill.,5-14; usually about 7. Red when first laid; but dry to Blotchy blackish brown with some pale areas. Incubation is by female only; 21-22 days. Young: Downy chicks leave nest with female a few hours after hatching. Female tends young (and broods them while they are small); but young feed themselves. Young capable of short flights at age of 10-12 days; but not full-grown for several weeks; remain with adult female until late summer.,Mostly buds; twigs; leaves; and seeds. Adult almost entirely vegetarian; feeding heavily on willow; alder; birch; and other plants; eating the buds; leaves; and twigs. Also eats many berries; such as crowberry and blueberry; and eats some insects. Regularly swallows grit to help with digesting rough plant material. Young chicks feed mostly on insects and spiders at first; soon beginning to eat more plant matter. ,In spring; male defends territory by displaying: raises red combs over eyes; throws head back; fans tail; droops wings; and struts about. Makes short flights; circling back to starting point while uttering harsh call. Nest site on ground; sometimes completely in open but often under willow shrub; grass clump; or other shelter. Nest (built by female) a shallow depression lined with grass; leaves; moss; feathers. 
Wilsons-Phalarope,Phalaropus tricolor,Sandpipers,Shallow prairie lakes; fresh marshes; mudflats; in migration; also salt marshes. Nests mostly at shallow fresh-water marshes in open country. In migration; may stop at ponds; coastal marshes; sewage treatment plants; but biggest concentrations are at salty or alkaline lakes. Winters mostly on salty lakes in South America.,Forages mostly while swimming (but does more walking on shore than other phalaropes). Picks up small items from surface of water; sometimes probes in soft mud. Sometimes stands still and catches flying insects; rarely pursues insects in the air.,4; sometimes 3. Buff; blotched with brown. Incubation is by male only; 18-27 days; usually about 23 days. Young: Downy young leave nest within a day after hatching. Male tends young and broods them while they are small; but young find all their own food. Male may try to lure predators away from nest or young by performing broken-wing act. Age of young at first flight and age at independence unknown.,Mostly aquatic insects and crustaceans. Eats a variety of flies and their larvae; beetles; true bugs; and other insects; mainly aquatic species. Also eats shrimp; copepods; seeds of marsh plants. During autumn and winter on salty lakes; may feed mostly on brine shrimp and brine flies. ,Females compete for males; one female may mate with more than one male during the season; leaving each of her mates to care for a set of eggs. In courtship; female stretches neck; puffs out neck feathers; makes chugging call. Nest site is usually on ground near water; sometimes a couple of inches above ground in marsh plants. Typical nest is shallow depression with slight lining of grass. Female may take the lead in choosing nest site; but male finishes nest. 
Wilsons-Plover,Charadrius wilsonia,Plovers,Open beaches; tidal flats; sandy islands. Found only in coastal regions; typically in very open areas such as white sand or shell beaches; estuaries; tidal mudflats. May favor islands; such as offshore barrier beaches; dredge spoil islands.,Typically they run a few steps and then pause; then run again; pecking at the ground whenever they spot something edible.,3; sometimes 2; rarely 4. Buff; blotched with brown and black. Incubation is by both parents; 23-25 days. Male usually incubates at night; female most of the day. Young: Downy young leave nest soon after hatching. Both parents tend young; but young feed themselves. Age at first flight roughly 21 days.,Many crustaceans; also worms; insects. Crustaceans in diet include many crabs; such as fiddler crabs and others; also crayfish; shrimp. Also eats small mollusks; marine worms; many insects and their larvae. ,Nests as isolated pairs or in loose colonies. In courtship; male goes through ritualized nest-scrape making; male postures near female with wings drooped; tail held low and spread; pattering with feet. Nest site is on dry part of beach; often near piece of driftwood; clump of grass; or other conspicuous object. Nest is simple scrape in sand or shell of beach; usually with sparse lining of pebbles; pieces of shell; grass; debris. Male makes several scrapes; female chooses one. 
Wilsons-Snipe,Gallinago delicata,Sandpipers,Marshes; bogs; wet meadows. In migration and winter found in a variety of damp habitats including fresh and salt marshes; muddy banks of rivers and ponds; wet pastures; flooded agricultural fields. In breeding season mostly around fresh marshes and bogs; shrubby streamsides; northern tundra.,Forages mostly by probing in soft mud; bill tip is sensitive and flexible; allowing the snipe to detect and capture prey underground. Also captures some food in shallow water or from surface of ground.,4; sometimes 3. Brown to olive-buff; marked with dark brown. Incubation is by female only; 18-21 days. Young: Downy young leave nest shortly after hatching. Parents may split brood; each caring for 1-2 of the chicks. Parents feed young at first; before they learn to find own food. Age at first flight about 19-20 days.,Mostly insects and earthworms. Eats many insects that burrow in damp soil or live in shallow water; such as larvae of crane flies; horse flies; various beetles; many others. At some places; diet includes many earthworms. Also eats some leeches; crustaceans; mollusks; spiders; frogs; leaves; seeds. ,In breeding season; especially at night; male performs "winnowing" display: flies in high circles; periodically making shallow dives; during dive; vibration of outer tail feathers produces a hollow whinnying sound. In aggressive and distraction displays on ground; bird crouches; raising and spreading tail to show off pattern. Nest site is on ground; usually well hidden in clump of grass or buried in tundra vegetation. Nest (built by female) is shallow depression lined with fine grasses; leaves; moss; sometimes with overhanging plants woven into a kind of canopy. 
Wilsons-Storm-Petrel,Oceanites oceanicus,Southern Storm-Petrels,Open ocean. Widespread at sea; from tropical and subtropical waters to edges of pack ice. Off North America mainly over continental shelf; may concentrate over upwellings and where warm and cool water currents meet; as along edges of Gulf Stream. Seldom close to land in nonbreeding season.,Takes food from surface of water. Forages mostly by hovering with feet touching water and picking at surface with bill; also by dropping into water and then resuming flight; sometimes by picking at items while swimming.,One. White; usually with reddish-brown dots at larger end. Incubation is by both sexes; usually 40-50 days; sometimes 38-59. Young:  Fed by both parents. Period from hatching to departure from nest (46-97 days) varies considerably; probably depends on rate of feeding. Young is independent of parents after leaving nest and going to sea.,Small crustaceans; fish. Feeds mainly on crustaceans (especially euphausiid shrimp and amphipods) and small fish; also small squid; marine worms; other small organisms. Scavenges at natural oil slicks and carrion; and will follow ships to pick at offal. ,Breeds on islands and cliffs of Antarctic region and around southern South America. Nesting is generally November to May. Males may arrive at nesting sites first; and unmated males may sit near nest entrance and call to defend site and attract female. Nest:  Site is in crevice or hole in cliff; among rock piles; or in burrow. Nest chamber usually lined with feathers and moss; sometimes bare. 
Wilsons-Warbler,Cardellina pusilla,Wood Warblers,Thickets along wooded streams; moist tangles; low shrubs; willows; alders. Breeds as far north as timberline; in thickets; second-growth; bogs; or in alder and willow groves near streams and ponds. In migration and winter; occurs from hot lowland thickets up to cool mountain woods; always in scrubby overgrown clearings and thin woods; not in the interior of dense forest.,Feeds usually within 10' of ground; searching actively among foliage of bushes. Hops on ground to probe among fallen leaves; and flutters up to take items from the undersides of leaves. Frequently flies out to catch flying insects in mid-air.,4-6; sometimes 2-7. Creamy white with variable marks of brown. Incubation is by female only; 10-13 days. Cowbirds regularly lay eggs in nests of this species. Young: Fed by both parents; brooded by female only. Young leave the nest about 8-13 days after hatching. Normally 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Presumably feeds mostly on insects; like other warblers. Frequent items in diet include bees; wasps; beetles; caterpillars; and aphids. Also eats some spiders; and sometimes berries. In winter in the tropics; sometimes feeds on protein corpuscles found at the bases of leaves of Cecropia trees. ,Populations that nest along Pacific Coast tend to lay fewer eggs and raise fewer offspring per nesting attempt; and males mate with only one female. Populations that nest in high mountains of West tend to lay more eggs per clutch and fledge more young; and some males have more than one mate. Nest: Usually on ground; sunken in moss or sedges; often at base of shrub. Along Pacific Coast; nests often placed up to 3' above ground; in shrubs or vines. Nest is bulky open cup; built by female; made of dead leaves; grass; and moss; lined with fine grass and hair. 
Winter-Wren,Troglodytes hiemalis,Wrens,Woodland underbrush; conifer forests (summer). Breeds mostly in moist coniferous forest with an understory of dense thickets; often close to water. Winters in very dense low growth in woods; especially along streambanks or among tangles; brushpiles; and fallen logs.,Usually forages very low among dense vegetation; searching for insects among foliage; on twigs and trunks; and on ground. When feeding low along streambanks; may take items from water's surface.,5-6; sometimes 4-7. White; with reddish brown dots often concentrated toward larger end. Incubation is by female; about 14-16 days. Young: Probably both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 19 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including many beetles; caterpillars; true bugs; ants; small wasps; and many others. Also eats many spiders; plus some millipedes and snails. Occasionally may eat tiny fish. Also sometimes eats berries; perhaps mainly in fall and winter. ,Male sings in spring to defend territory and attract a mate. In courtship; male perches near female; with wings half-opened and fluttering; tail spread and moving from side to side; while he sings or calls. Male may have more than one mate. Nest site is in any kind of natural cavity close to the ground (lower than about 6'); including holes among upturned roots of downed trees; cavities in rotten stumps; old woodpecker holes; crevices among rocks; holes in streambanks; sometimes under porches of cabins. Within cavity; both sexes help build nest of grass; weeds; moss; rootlets; lined with animal hair and feathers. Male may also build several unlined "dummy" nests. 
Wood-Duck,Aix sponsa,Ducks and Geese,Wooded swamps; rivers; ponds. Favors shallow inland lakes; ponds; slow-moving rivers; swamps; mainly those surrounded by deciduous or mixed woodland. Often in places where large trees overhang the water; creating shady conditions. Also in open marshes within generally forested country.,forages in water by taking food from surface; submerging head and neck; occasionally up-ending; also by walking on land.,9-14; sometimes 6-15. Dull white to pale buff. Females frequently lay eggs in each others' nests; sometimes in "dump nests" where no incubation ever takes place. Incubation is by female only; 25-35 days. Young: ducklings remain in nest until morning after hatching. Clinging with sharp claws and bracing with tails; young climb to cavity entrance; jump to ground. Female tends young. Two or more broods may combine. Young are tended by females for 5-6 weeks; capable of flight at about 8-9 weeks. 1 brood per year in north; often 2 in south.,mostly seeds. Feeds on aquatic plants and their seeds; fallen seeds of trees and shrubs; also insects and crustaceans. Acorns are a major part of diet in many areas. Also comes to fields to feed on waste grain. Young feed mainly on insects and other invertebrates. ,Courtship displays of male involve postures that show off colorful plumage. Nest sites are in large tree cavities near water; up to 65' above ground. Cavity lined with down. Rarely nests in hollow fallen logs; barn lofts; crevices in rocks. Uses artificial nest boxes; even when these are placed low and in open marsh. 
Wood-Sandpiper,Tringa glareola,Sandpipers,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Wood-Stork,Mycteria americana,Storks,Cypress swamps (nesting colonies); marshes; ponds; lagoons. Forages mainly in fresh water; including shallow marshes; flooded  farm fields; ponds; ditches. Favors falling water levels (when fish and other prey likely to be more concentrated in remaining pools). Nests mainly in stands of tall cypress; also sometimes in mangroves; dead trees in flooded impoundments.,Forages mainly by wading in shallow water with head down; bill in water and partly open; quickly snaps bill shut when it makes contact with prey. Can locate prey by touch or sight.,3-4; sometimes 2-5. Whitish. Incubation is by both sexes; 28-32 days. Young: Fed by both parents. During first 5 weeks or so; one parent usually guards young; unguarded nests may be attacked by unmated storks wandering through colony. Young may make short flights at about 8 weeks; but return to nest to be fed and to sleep until about 11 weeks old.,Mostly fish. Eats a wide variety of fish; especially minnows; killifish; mullet. Also crayfish; crabs; aquatic insects; snakes; baby alligators; small turtles; frogs; rodents; some seeds and other plant material. ,Breeds in colonies. Nests in winter and spring in Florida; where water levels (because of their impact on food supply) may dictate timing. In some years; may not attempt to nest at all. Nest site depends on colony location; may be 10-15' above water in mangroves; 80' or higher in cypress; usually well out on horizontal limb. Nest is flimsy platform of sticks; lined with twigs and leaves; male brings most materials; female may do most of building. Some sticks added to nest even after young hatch. 
Wood-Thrush,Hylocichla mustelina,Thrushes,Mainly deciduous woodlands. Breeds in the understory of woodlands; mostly deciduous but sometimes mixed; in areas with tall trees. More numerous in damp forest and near streams than in drier woods; will nest in suburban areas where there are enough large trees. In migration; found in various kinds of woodland. Winters in understory of lowland tropical forest.,Forages mostly on ground; usually in forest undergrowth but occasionally on open lawns. Will use its bill to flip leaf-litter aside as it seeks insects. Feeds on berries up in shrubs and trees.,Usually 3-4. Pale greenish blue; unmarked. Incubation is by female only; 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 12 days after hatching. 1-2 broods per year.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds on many insects; especially in breeding season; including beetles; caterpillars; ants; crickets; moths; and many others; also spiders; earthworms; and snails. Berries and small fruits are eaten at all seasons. Young are fed mostly insects but also some berries. ,Male arrives first on breeding grounds; establishes territory; and defends it by singing. Often reacts aggressively to other thrushes in territory; such as Robin or Veery. In courtship; male may chase female in fast circular flights among the trees. Nest: Placed in vertical fork of tree (usually deciduous) or saddled on horizontal branch; usually about 10-15' above the ground; sometimes lower; rarely as high as 50'. Nest (built by female) is rather like Robin's nest; an open cup of grass; leaves; moss; weeds; bark strips; mixed with mud; has lining of soft material such as rootlets. Often adds pieces of white paper or other trash to nest. 
Woodhouses-Scrub-Jay,Aphelocoma woodhouseii,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Arid woodlands of juniper and pinyon pine; plus pine-oak woodlands and oak scrub in foothills. Also found in some suburban areas and parks. In winter; may disperse to lowland riverside woods.,Forages on the ground and in trees; singly or in family units during breeding season; sometimes in flocks at other seasons. Often harvests acorns and buries them; perhaps to retrieve them later.,3-5; sometimes 2-7. Usually light green; spotted with olive or brown; sometimes paler gray or green with large reddish-brown spots. Incubation is by female; about 17-18 days. Male sometimes feeds female during incubation.,Omnivorous. Diet varies with season. Eats a wide variety of insects; especially in summer; as well as a few spiders and snails. Moth caterpillars make up a major percentage of the items fed to the young. Winter diet may be mostly acorns and other seeds; nuts; and berries. Also eats some rodents; eggs and young of other birds; and small reptiles and amphibians.,Unlike the Florida Scrub-Jay and Mexican Jay; this species breeds in isolated pairs; not cooperative flocks. Pairs typically stay together all year on their permanent territory. Nest site is in a shrub or tree; usually fairly low; 5-15 above the ground; but sometimes higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is a well-built; thick-walled cup of twigs and grass; lined with rootlets and sometimes with animal hair.
Worm-eating-Warbler,Helmitheros vermivorum,Wood Warblers,Leafy wooded slopes. During breeding season; frequents dense deciduous woodlands. Prefers cool; shaded banks; sheer gullies and steep; forested slopes covered with medium-sized trees and an undergrowth of saplings and shrubs. In winter in the tropics; forages alone in dense thickets or in the forest undergrowth; usually near the ground.,Forages mostly in trees and shrubs. Probes in curled; dead leaves for insects; and searches on bark of trunks and limbs. Forages also on the ground; walking while seeking insects on the leaf-litter.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. White; with brown spots and blotches. Incubated by female alone; 13 days. In most areas; rarely parasitized by cowbirds; possibly because it breeds mainly in dense woods far from edges. In some areas; parasitism by cowbirds appears to be more common. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave the nest at 10 days of age. Probably 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Eats smooth caterpillars; but rarely or never takes the earthworms that the name would seem to imply. Also feeds on small grasshoppers; bugs; ants; bees; walkingsticks; beetles; sawfly larvae; and spiders. Feeds nestlings on moths and grubs. ,Males defend territories by singing from perches at mid-levels or on the ground. Besides the usual insect-like trill; male also sings a musical; varied song during flight as part of courtship. Nest: Placed on ground; normally on hillside against a deciduous shrub or sapling; well concealed by dead leaves. Nest (constructed by female) is an open cup of dead leaf skeletons; lined with fungus filaments; hair moss; maple seed stems; animal hair. 
Wrentit,Chamaea fasciata,Sylviid Warblers,Chaparral; brush; parks; garden shrubs. Within its range; the Wrentit inhabits most kinds of dense low growth. Most common in chaparral; thickets of poison oak; and coastal sage scrub; also lives in streamside thickets and in shrubby areas in suburbs and city parks. Extends very locally to edge of desert.,Forages actively in dense low growth; gleaning insects from twigs; sometimes hanging upside down to examine foliage. Sometimes hovers briefly while taking an item. Will hold a large insect with one foot while breaking off the wings.,4; sometimes 3-5. Pale greenish blue; unmarked. Incubation is by both parents; about 16 days. Female reportedly incubates at night; both sexes taking turns during the day. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest about 15-16 days after hatching; are tended by parents for another 2-3 weeks.,Mostly insects and berries. Feeds heavily on insects; especially in spring and summer; including ants; small wasps; caterpillars; beetles; scale insects; leafhoppers; and others; plus spiders. Eats many berries; especially in fall and winter; including those of poison oak. Will come to bird feeders for bread crumbs or other soft items; and takes sugar-water from hummingbird feeders. ,May mate for life. Pairs remain together on nesting territory at all seasons. Nest: Well hidden by foliage in a dense low shrub; usually 1-4' above the ground; rarely above 10' in small tree. Firmly lashed into place; attached to clusters of twigs or built in fork of branch. Nest (built by both sexes) is a neatly constructed; compact cup; typically made of strips of bark and spiderwebs; lined with fine plant fibers and sometimes animal hair. Outside of nest may be decorated with bits of lichen. 
Xantuss-Hummingbird,Hylocharis xantusii,Hummingbirds,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Yellow-Rail,Coturnicops noveboracensis,Rails; Gallinules; Coots,Grassy marshes; meadows. In summer; favors large wet meadows or shallow marshes dominated by sedges and grasses. Typically in fresh or brackish marsh with water no more than a foot deep. In winter mostly in coastal salt marsh; especially drier areas with dense stands of spartina; also rice fields; damp meadows near coast.,Foraging of wild birds essentially unknown. Yellow Rails in captivity feed only by day; picking food from ground; plants; or water.,Usually 8-10. Buffy white; with reddish brown spots around larger end. Incubation is apparently by female only; about 17-18 days. Male may remain near nest during incubation. Young: Apparently fed by female only. Remain in nest only about 2 days; then follow female about in marsh. When not foraging; female and brood go to second nest (not the one in which the eggs hatched). Young find much of their own food after 2 weeks; all of it after 3 weeks; probably able to fly at about 5 weeks.,Mostly insects; snails; seeds. Diet not well known; but small freshwater snails reported to be important at some seasons. Eats a wide variety of insects (especially aquatic ones); also spiders; small crustaceans; probably earthworms. Also eats many seeds; at least in fall and winter. ,Male defends territory by calling; mostly at night. In courtship; male and female may preen each other's feathers. Nest site is in shallow part of marsh; on damp soil or over water less than 6" deep. Nest is shallow cup of sedges and grasses; with concealing canopy of dead plants above it. May build more than one nest; with extra(s) being used for brooding the chicks after they leave their hatching nest. Male takes part in starting nests; but female completes the work. 
Yellow-Warbler,Setophaga petechia,Wood Warblers,Bushes; swamp edges; streams; gardens. Breeds in a variety of habitats in east; including woods and thickets along edges of streams; lakes; swamps; and marshes; favoring willows; alders; and other moisture-loving plants. Also in dryer second-growth woods; orchards; roadside thickets. In west; restricted to streamside thickets. In winter in the tropics; favors semi-open country; woodland edges; towns.,Forages from low levels up to treetops. Takes insects from twigs and foliage; hovers briefly to take items from underside of leaves; and flies out after flying insects. Males tend to forage higher and in more open foliage than females. Forages alone in winter in the tropics; defending a winter feeding territory.,4-5; sometimes 3-6. Greenish-white; with variety of specks or spots of brown; olive; and gray. Incubated solely by female; 11-12 days. Male feeds female on nest. Very frequently parasitized by cowbirds. May defend against parasitism by rebuilding new nest on top of cowbird eggs; or by deserting nest. Young: Fed by both parents (female does more). Young leave the nest 9-12 days after hatching.,Mostly insects. Up to two-thirds of diet may be caterpillars of various kinds. Also feeds on mayflies; moths; mosquitoes; beetles; damselflies; treehoppers; and other insects; plus spiders; also eats a few berries. ,Males defend nesting territories by singing; sometimes performing fluttering flight displays. Male courts female by actively pursuing her for 1-4 days. Nest: Placed in upright fork of branches in shrubs; small trees; and briars from 2-60' above ground. Nest (built by female) is compact open cup of weed stalks; shredded bark; grass; lined with plant down or fur. Males accompany females on trips to the nest and will occasionally help build. Females will steal nest material from other nests. 
Yellow-bellied-Flycatcher,Empidonax flaviventris,Tyrant Flycatchers,Woods; in summer; boreal forests; muskegs; bogs. Breeds in wet northern forest; especially in spruce bogs with ground cover of sphagnum moss; also in tamarack-white cedar swamps; and in willow-alder thickets along streams in dense coniferous forest. In winter; lives in undergrowth of tropical forest.,Forages by watching from a perch; usually at low to mid levels in the forest; and then flying out to catch insects in the air. Also takes some food (such as caterpillars and spiders) from foliage or twigs while hovering. May sometimes take some insects while perched.,3-4; sometimes 5. White; lightly spotted with brown. Incubation is by female only; 12-14 days. Young: Both parents bring food for nestlings. Age of young at first flight about 13-14 days. Probably only 1 brood per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds on a variety of small insects; both flying types and those taken from foliage; including many ants and small wasps; also flies; beetles; true bugs; caterpillars; moths; and others. Also eats many spiders; and eats small numbers of berries and sometimes seeds. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing; often from an exposed perch. Adults tend to be quiet and inconspicuous around the nest. Nest site is usually in dense sphagnum moss on or just above the ground in boggy places; sometimes placed among the upturned roots of a fallen tree; or in other sheltered low spot. Generally well hidden within mosses with only a small entrance showing; and very difficult to find. Nest is bulky cup of mosses; mixed with weeds and rootlets; lined with grass; sedges; and many fine rootlets. 
Yellow-bellied-Sapsucker,Sphyrapicus varius,Woodpeckers,Woodlands; aspen groves; in winter; also orchards; other trees. In summer mostly in mixed coniferous and deciduous woods; especially around aspens. May be found in any kind of woods or even dry brush in migration. Winters mostly in deciduous trees.,Drills tiny holes in tree bark; usually in neatly spaced rows; and then returns to them periodically to feed on the sap that oozes out. Also eats bits of cambium and other tree tissues; as well as insects that are attracted to the sap. Besides drilling sap wells; also gleans insects from tree trunks in more typical woodpecker fashion; and sallies out to catch insects in the air. Berries and fruits are eaten at all seasons; and birds may concentrate in fruiting wild trees in winter.,5-6; sometimes 3-7. White. Incubation is by both sexes (with male incubating at night and part of day); 12-13 days. Both parents feed young; bringing them insects; sap; and fruit. Young leave nest 25-29 days after hatching. Parents teach young the sapsucking habit; feed them for about 10 days after they leave nest. 1 brood per year.,Includes insects; tree sap; fruit. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including many ants (taken from tree trunks). Also regularly feeds on tree sap; and on berries and fruits. ,Males tend to arrive on breeding grounds before females. Courtship displays include pointing bill up to show off colored throat patch; ritualized tapping at nest site. Nest site is cavity in tree; usually deciduous tree such as aspen; poplar; birch; 6-60' above ground. Often uses same tree in consecutive years; rarely same nest hole. Favors trees affected by tinder fungus; which softens heartwood while leaving outer part of trunk firm. Both sexes help excavate. 
Yellow-billed-Cuckoo,Coccyzus americanus,Cuckoos; Roadrunners; Anis,Woodlands; thickets; orchards; streamside groves. Breeds mostly in dense deciduous stands; including forest edges; tall thickets; dense second growth; overgrown orchards; scrubby oak woods. Often in willow groves around marshes. In the west; mostly in streamside trees; including cottonwood-willow groves in arid country.,Forages by clambering about through shrubs and trees; gleaning insects from foliage and branches. May fly up and hover momentarily to pluck a caterpillar or other creature from foliage; sometimes flies out from a perch to catch a flying insect.,3-4; sometimes 1-5 or even more; may lay more eggs in seasons when caterpillars or other insects are abundant. Occasionally lays eggs in nest of Black-billed Cuckoo or other bird. Eggs pale bluish green. Incubation is by both parents (but female may do more); 9-11 days; perhaps sometimes longer. Young: Fed by both parents. Young may leave nest and climb about in branches after about a week; can fly in about 3 weeks. In some cases; first young to leave the nest are tended by male; last ones by female.,Caterpillars and other insects. Feeds heavily on caterpillars when available; including hairy types such as tent caterpillars and others; also other insects such as cicadas; beetles; grasshoppers; katydids; others. Also may eat some lizards; frogs; eggs of other birds; and berries and small fruits. ,In courtship; male feeds female. Nest site is in tree; shrub; or vines; usually 4-10' above the ground; sometimes up to 20' or higher. Nest (built by both sexes) is a small; loosely-made platform of twigs and stems; with thin lining of grass; pine needles; leaves; and other materials. 
Yellow-billed-Loon,Gavia adamsii,Loons,Tundra lakes in summer; coastal waters in winter. Breeds in high Arctic tundra region; often on large lakes but also on smaller lakes if good feeding areas are nearby; may fly up to 5 miles from nest site to feeding areas on rivers; coastal lagoons. In winter on ocean; generally on bays; inlets; among island groups; rarely on large lakes in interior.,Loons do their foraging by diving from the surface and swimming underwater. They often swim along the surface with their heads partly submerged; peering about underwater; watching for prey before they dive. They are propelled mainly by their feet; but may sometimes use their wings also when turning or in bursts of speed. Loons find their food by sight.,2. Brown or olive; spotted with blackish-brown. Incubation period 27-29 days; both parents incubate. Young:  Leave nest 1-2 days after hatching. Adults very aggressive in defense of downy young. Young are fed by both parents; sometimes ride on parents' backs. Second chick of brood often disappears a few days after hatching. Age at first flight not known; probably about 12 weeks. One brood per year.,Probably mostly fish. Diet not well known. Apparently feeds mainly on small to medium-sized fish; including sculpin; tomcod; rock cod; also crustaceans and mollusks; probably some insects in summer. Young may eat some plant material. ,May mate for life. In courtship displays; pairs dip bills in water repeatedly; splash-dive and swim past each other underwater. Nest:  Male may select site; both sexes probably help build nest. Site is always very near water; on island or shore; and may be partly hidden by surrounding vegetation. Nest; often re-used from year to year; is a mound of tundra vegetation with depression at center; sometimes turf is overturned to form a mud foundation. 
Yellow-billed-Magpie,Pica nuttalli,Crows; Magpies; Jays,Stream groves; scattered oaks; ranches; farms. Most numerous in open oak savanna and where riverside groves of oaks; cottonwoods; and sycamores border on open country such as pastures or farmland.,NA,5-8; usually 7. Olive-buff; marked with brown or olive. Incubation is by female; about 18 days. Male brings food to incubating female. Young: Both parents feed young. Time to fledging not well known; but parents may continue to feed young for several weeks after they leave nest. 1 brood per year.,Omnivorous. Diet varies with season; but year-round may average about 30% plant material; 70% animal material (mainly insects). May feed heavily on acorns in fall and winter; cracking them open by pounding with bill; also eats carrion in winter. Eats many grasshoppers in late summer. When foraging on ground; may use bill to flip over cow dung; wood chips; etc.; to look for food. Magpies also steal food from each other and from other animals. Sometimes cache food items (such as acorns) in shallow holes in ground; tree crevices; etc,Nests in small colonies. Pair formation may begin in fall; although birds remain in flocks during winter. Main courtship ritual involves male feeding female. Nest: Both sexes build nest; placing it far out on limb high in tree (usually 40-60' above ground). Nest often built on top of mistletoe clump; and even if not; may resemble such a clump from a distance. Nest is bulky domed structure (2-3' in diameter) with entrance on side; made of sticks and twigs. Interior of nest has base usually made of mud; lined with fine plant materials. 
Yellow-breasted-Chat,Icteria virens,Yellow-breasted Chats,Brushy tangles; briars; stream thickets. Breeds in very dense scrub (such as willow thickets) and briary tangles; often along streams and at the edges of swamps or ponds. Sometimes in dry overgrown pastures; and upland thickets along margins of woods. In winter in the tropics; found in open scrub and woodland edges in the lowlands.,Forages by searching among foliage among dense low tangles or by perching to eat berries. Unlike any other warbler; will hold its food with one foot while it feeds. Forages alone during migration and winter; rather than joining feeding flocks.,3-4; up to 6. Eggs large; creamy white; with brown spots at large end. Incubation by female only; 11 days. Commonly parasitized by Brown-headed Cowbirds. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave the nest about 8 days after hatching. Normally 2 broods per year.,Insects and berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including moths; beetles; bugs; ants; bees; wasps; mayflies; grasshoppers; katydids; caterpillars; and praying mantises; also spiders. Up to half of diet (or more in fall) may be berries and wild fruit; including blackberries; elderberries; wild grapes; and others. Wintering birds in the Northeast often come to bird-feeders; where they will take many unnatural items such as suet or peanut butter. ,During courtship; male displays to female by pointing bill up and swaying from side to side. In flight song display; male flies up singing; hovers; drops slowly with its wings flapping over its back and legs dangling loosely; then returns to perch. Occasionally nests in loose colonies. Nest: Placed 1-8' above the ground; well concealed in dense shrub or tangled vines. Large open cup nest is constructed by female. Outer base of dead leaves; straw; and weeds provides support for a tightly woven inner nest of vine bark; lined with fine weed stems and grass. 
Yellow-chevroned-Parakeet,Brotogeris chiriri,African and New World Parrots,In its native South America it is found more frequently in open woodlands; savannas; and may prefer disturbed savannas and towns. In the U.S. it prefers open habitat; towns and will commonly be found alongside the similar White-winged Parakeet; even nesting in the same tree.,NA,NA,NA,4-5 eggs are laid in cavities in dead trees and palm fronds.
Yellow-crowned-Night-Heron,Nyctanassa violacea,Herons; Egrets; Bitterns,Cypress swamps; mangroves; bayous; streams. Commonly occurs in shallow tidal waters; also along lowland rivers; where trees or other heavy cover nearby. Seldom in open marshes. Nests in mangrove or cypress swamps; riverside groves; thickets near water. Sometimes nests in trees within suburbs or cities.,Forages by walking slowly on land or in shallow water; or standing still waiting for prey to approach. Feeds at dusk and at night; but also commonly by day. Feeding schedule near coast probably influenced by tides.,4-5; sometimes 2-8. Pale blue-green. Incubation is by both sexes; 21-25 days. Young:  Both parents feed young. Age at first flight unknown.,Includes many crustaceans. More of a specialist than most herons. Feeds heavily on crustaceans; mainly crabs and crayfish; especially in coastal areas. Also some mollusks; frogs; insects; fish. On inland waters; diet may be more varied. ,Breeding behavior not well known. Often nests in isolated pairs or in very small groups; especially in northern part of range. Where common; nests in colonies; sometimes mixed with Black-crowned Night-Herons or other waders. Displays include stretching the neck upward with bill pointing skyward; crouching with all plumes erected; and giving a loud call. Pairs greet each other by raising crest; calling; touching bills; nibbling at each other's feathers. Nest:  Site is usually in tree 30-40' above ground; but sometimes very close to ground or water in thickets; mangroves. Nest is a platform of sticks; lined with finer twigs and sometimes leaves. 
Yellow-eyed-Junco,Junco phaeonotus,New World Sparrows,Conifer forests; pine-oak woods. A bird of mountain forests throughout its range. In our area; breeds at middle and upper elevations of mountains near Mexican border; mostly in forests of pine and Douglas-fir; but also down into pine-oak woods. Slight downhill movement in winter may bring a few into areas of scrub oak and pinyon-juniper woods.,Does most of its foraging on the ground. Will scratch in the soil or leaf-litter to find food; making a little forward jump and then scratching back with both feet at once. Also does some foraging up in shrubs and sometimes in trees. Will hunt for food around picnic areas and campgrounds in the mountains.,3-4; sometimes 5. Pale gray or bluish white; spotted with reddish brown. Incubation is by female only; about 15 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest about 10 days after hatching; cannot fly well for about another week. 2 or 3 broods per year.,Mostly seeds and insects. Diet is not known in detail; apparently feeds on insects more in summer than in winter. May eat mostly seeds; including those of weeds and grasses. Also known to eat some flowers; buds; and berries. ,Male sings to defend nesting territory; often from a perch high in a tree. Males also may be very aggressive in territorial defense; actively fighting with intruders of their own kind. In courtship; male may strut about near female with his tail spread widely; while giving a soft song. Nest site is usually on the ground; sometimes in a shrub or low tree but rarely more than a few feet high. Nests on ground are often placed in a slight depression and hidden under something such as a log; rock; base of a shrub; or overhanging clump of grass. Nest (built by female; sometimes with help from male) is shallow cup of grass; lined with fine grass and sometimes animal hair. 
Yellow-footed-Gull,Larus livens,Gulls and Terns,In U.S.; barren shoreline of Salton Sea. Visitors to Salton Sea concentrate on west side; mostly on open shoreline; sometimes foraging in flooded fields nearby. In Gulf of California; found around islands and shoreline; sometimes well out to sea but almost never inland.,Feeding behavior not well known. Forages while walking; wading; or swimming; sometimes plunging into water in flight.,Usually 3. Olive to buff; marked with dark brown. Incubation is probably by both parents. Young: Probably fed by both parents. Probably able to fly at about 6-7 weeks after hatching.,Fish; other marine life. Diet poorly known. On Gulf of California; probably includes fish; crabs; shrimp; clams; wide variety of other sea creatures. Also takes eggs and young of other birds. Will eat carrion; and scavenges around dumps and docks for scraps and refuse. ,Breeding behavior not well known; probably similar to that of Western Gull. Nests in colonies; with different arrangement from those of Western Gull: nests are arranged in a line along beach just above the reach of the highest tides; and each pair may defend a narrow territory from the nest down to the water. Nest site is on ground; on beach or at base of cliffs; a short distance above the high-tide line. Nest is a shallow depression; lined with seaweed; grass; or other plant material. 
Yellow-green-Vireo,Vireo flavoviridis,Vireos,Resaca woodlands; shade trees. In Texas; a rare nesting bird; usually in native woods near oxbow lakes (resacas) or in shade trees in towns. In Mexico and Central America; breeds in many kinds of open woods; mature forest; second growth; edges of clearings. Winters in lowland tropical forest in South America.,Forages by searching for insects among the foliage; often hovering briefly to pick insects from the undersides of leaves.,Usually 3; sometimes 2. White; with specks of brown. Incubation is by female alone; 13-14 days. Young: Both parents feed the nestlings. Young leave the nest 12-14 days after hatching; but can fly only poorly at this stage.,Mostly insects and spiders; some berries. Feeds on a wide variety of insects; including tree crickets and various smooth caterpillars; also many others. Also eats many spiders. Diet includes berries and small fruits; including those of mistletoe; and some seeds; including those of the tropical shrub Clusia. ,Details of the breeding behavior have not been well studied. Males sing persistently in spring and summer to defend the nesting territory. Nest: Placed 5-40' above the ground in branch of tree or shrub. Nest (built by female alone) is a neatly built open cup; with its rim woven onto a horizontal forked twig. Nest is made of grass blades; plant fibers; cobwebs; strips of papery bark; the outside often heavily decorated with spiderwebs; lined with fine plant fibers. 
Yellow-headed-Blackbird,Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus,Blackbirds and Orioles,Fresh marshes. Forages in fields; open country. Breeds in freshwater sloughs; marshy lake borders; tall cattails growing in water up to 3-4' deep. Forages around marshes and also commonly in open pastures; plowed fields; cattle pens; feedlots.,Forages mostly by walking on the ground in open fields or near the water's edge; also forages low in marsh vegetation. Sometimes catches insects in flight. May follow farm machinery in fields to feed on insects and grubs turned up by the plow. Except in nesting season; usually forages in flocks; often associated with other blackbirds.,4; sometimes 3-5. Pale gray to pale green; blotched and dotted with brown or gray. Incubation is by female only; 11-13 days. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest after about 9-12 days; but remain among dense marsh plants until they are ready to fly; about 3 weeks after hatching. 1 brood per year; possibly 2.,Mostly insects and seeds. Feeds heavily on insects in summer; especially beetles; caterpillars; and grasshoppers; also ants; wasps; and others; plus a few spiders and snails. Young are fed mostly insects. Probably two-thirds of diet consists of seeds; including grass and weed seeds plus waste grain. ,Typically nests in colonies in marshes; each male selecting territory within colony and defending it against rivals by singing. One male may have as many as 5 mates. Nest: Placed in marsh; firmly lashed to standing vegetation (cattails; bulrushes; reeds) growing in water; usually no more than 3' above water's surface. Nest (built by female) is a bulky; deep cup woven of aquatic plants; lined with dry grass or with fine; dry marsh plants. 
Yellow-headed-Parrot,Amazona oratrix,African and New World Parrots,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Yellow-legged-Gull,Larus michahellis,Gulls and Terns,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Yellow-naped-Parrot,Amazona auropalliata,African and New World Parrots,Tropical woodlands and forests. This habitat provides its main food sources; fruits; seeds; nuts; berries; blossoms and leafy buds of foliage; which is similar to many parrots of the region.,NA,NA,NA,3-4 eggs are incubated for 26-28 days and the young fledge at 8-12 weeks.
Yellow-nosed-Albatross,Thalassarche chlororhynchos,Albatrosses,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Yellow-rumped-Warbler,Setophaga coronata,Wood Warblers,Conifer forests. In winter; varied; open woods; brush; thickets; gardens; even beaches. In the North; breeds in coniferous and mixed forests; preferring more open stands and edges in pine; fir; spruce; aspen; also spruce-tamarack bogs. In West; breeds up to 12;000' in mountain conifer forests. In winter; common in many lowland habitats; especially coastal bayberry thickets in East and streamside woods in West.,Versatile in its feeding. Searches among twigs and leaves; and will hover while taking insects from foliage. Often flies out to catch flying insects. Will forage on ground; and will cling to tree trunks and branches. Males tend to forage higher than females during the breeding season. In winter; usually forages in flocks.,4-5; sometimes only 3. Creamy white with brown and gray marks. Incubated usually by female; 12-13 days. Occasionally the male will cover the eggs. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave nest after 10-12 days; can fly short distances 2-3 days later. First brood probably fed mostly by male after fledging. Normally 2 broods per year.,Insects and berries. Feeds on caterpillars; wasps; grasshoppers; gnats; aphids; beetles; and many other insects; also spiders. Feeds in winter on berries of bayberry; juniper; wax myrtle; poison ivy; and others. Can winter farther north than most warblers because it can digest the wax in berry coatings. ,During courtship; male accompanies female everywhere; fluffs his side feathers; raises his wings and his colorful crown feathers; calls and flutters. Nest: Placed 4-50' above ground; usually on horizontal branch away from trunk of conifer; sometimes in deciduous tree; or sometimes in fork where branch meets trunk. Nest (built by female) is open cup made of bark fibers; weeds; twigs; roots; lined with hair and feathers in such a way as to curve over and partly cover the eggs. 
Yellow-throated-Vireo,Vireo flavifrons,Vireos,Deciduous woodlands; shade trees. Breeds in tall trees in open deciduous woods. Prefers trees such as oaks and maples along streams; lakes; and roadsides. Also will summer in tall trees or orchards in towns. Avoids areas with dense undergrowth. Generally absent in mixed or coniferous forest; where it is probably replaced by the Solitary Vireo. Winters in tropical lowlands and foothills; in habitats ranging from rain forest to dry scrub.,Forages by searching for insects rather methodically along the twigs and in foliage high in trees. In winter; defends feeding territory and will drive away others of its own kind; but will associate with mixed foraging flocks of other birds.,4; sometimes 3-5. Pinkish or creamy white with heavy spots of brown or lavender near large end. Incubation is by both parents; 14-15 days. Frequently parasitized by cowbirds. Young: Both parents feed nestlings. Young leave the nest 14-15 days after hatching. The parents divide the fledglings; each adult caring for part of the brood.,Mostly insects; some berries. Feeds mainly on insects. In summer; over one-third of diet may be caterpillars; moths; and butterflies; also eats true bugs; scale insects; aphids; leafhoppers; beetles; sawflies; tree crickets; dragonflies; cicadas; and others. Will also eat various berries; especially in fall. ,Male defends nesting territory by singing incessantly. In courtship; male leads female to potential nest sites. Nest: Placed in tree (usually deciduous); generally 20-40' above the ground but can be 3-60' up. Both sexes help build open thick-walled cup nest; supported by the rim woven onto a horizontal forked twig. Nest made of weeds; shreds of bark; grass; leaves; and plant fibers. Outside of nest bound with spiderwebs and camouflaged with lichens and mosses; lined with fine grass and pine needles. 
Yellow-throated-Warbler,Setophaga dominica,Wood Warblers,Open woodlands; groves; especially live oaks; pines; sycamores. Breeds in a variety of southern forest types. On southern Atlantic coastal plain; occurs in old live oaks covered with Spanish moss. In south; lives in pine forest and cypress swamps. In Mississippi Valley; also breeds along streams in bottomland woods; especially of sycamores. During winter; often forages in palm groves.,Favorite method of foraging includes much creeping along on branches and leaning trunks. Probes into crevices in bark with its long bill. Also flies out to catch flying insects in mid-air. In winter in the tropics; frequently seen searching for insects by hanging upside down among leaves of palms.,Usually 4; sometimes 5. Dull grayish white; with spots of purple; red and brown. Incubation period is probably 12-13 days. Female incubates; and possibly male does also. Young: Probably both parents feed nestlings; but details (including age at which the young leave the nest) are not well known. Usually 2 broods per year.,Mostly insects. Feeds on many insects including beetles; moths; caterpillars; grasshoppers; crickets; flies; mosquitoes; ants; scale insects; aphids; and others; also spiders. ,Arrives on breeding grounds early in spring; and males defend nesting territory by singing. Nest: Placed in Spanish moss at end of branch. Where Spanish moss does not occur; nest is placed on high branch of pine; sycamore; or cypress; usually 30-60' up; sometimes 4-120' above ground. Nest is an open cup made of grass; moss; bark strips; weeds; caterpillar webs; and lined with plant down and feathers. Built by both sexes; but mostly by female. 
Zenaida-Dove,Zenaida aurita,Pigeons and Doves,NA,NA,NA,NA,NA
Zone-tailed-Hawk,Buteo albonotatus,Hawks and Eagles,River woodlands; desert mountains; canyons. Mostly forages over open country; such as grassland; desert; chaparral; or areas with scattered trees. Seems to favor hilly or mountainous terrain; and may soar on updrafts from cliffs. Nests in very large trees; often in isolated groves along rivers; in steep canyons; or near cliffs.,In hunting; it soars and circles like a vulture; and thus may be ignored by smaller animals below. When it spots prey; it continues to circle as before; but gradually moves off to side and lower; as soon as it is screened from the prey animal by some kind of cover; the hawk turns and makes a direct; powerful attack; taking the prey by surprise. Sometimes makes steeper direct dives without this kind of stealthy approach.,2; sometimes 1-3. White (or pale bluish-white when freshly laid); sometimes with a few spots of tan or gray. Incubation is probably by the female only; about 35 days. Young: Probably the female stays with the young during the first two weeks after they hatch; while the male brings food and female gives it to the young; later; both sexes hunt. Young are able to fly in about 6-7 weeks.,Mostly lizards; mammals; birds. Diet varies with location. In some areas; may specialize on certain large lizards; such as spiny lizards or collared lizards. In other areas; birds are main items in diet. Also eats many small mammals; plus some frogs; snakes; insects; centipedes. ,In breeding season; pairs may circle high in air; calling. In another display; bird flaps to high elevation while calling and then dives steeply; almost to ground. Nest site is typically in tall tree such as cottonwood or pine; along river or near cliffs; tree is often somewhat isolated and is usually among the largest in the vicinity. Nest is usually more than 30' above ground; up to 100' or higher. Sometimes nests on cliff ledges. Nest is a bulky platform of sticks; lined with green leafy twigs. Same nest site may be used for many years. 
